 
B. Tech.  Computer Science and Engineering 
Cyber Security 
Under Regulations- (R-2023) 
(w.e.f. 2023-24 admitted batch) 
 
 
 
Course Structure and Syllabi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
MURUKAMBATTU - CHITTOOR (Dt) 517127 
ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
 
 
PROGRAM OUTCOMES (PO) 
PO 1: Engineering knowledge: Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering 
fundamentals, and an engineering specialization for the solution of complex engineering problems. 
PO 2: Problem analysis: Identify, formulate, research literature, and Analyse complex engineering 
problems reaching substantiated conclusions using first principles of mathematics, natural sciences, 
and engineering sciences. 
PO 3: Design/Development of Solutions: Design solutions for complex engineering problems and 
design system components or processes that meet the specified needs with appropriate consideration 
for public health and safety, and cultural, societal, and environmental considerations. 
PO 4: Conduct investigations of complex problems: Use research-based knowledge and research 
methods including design of experiments, analysis and interpretation of data, and synthesis of the 
information to provide valid conclusions. 
PO 5: Modern tool usage: Create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, and modern 
engineering and IT tools including prediction and modelling to complex engineering activities with 
an understanding of the limitations. 
PO 6: The engineer and society: Apply reasoning informed by the contextual knowledge to assess 
societal, health, safety, legal, and cultural issues and the consequent responsibilities relevant to the 
professional engineering practice. 
PO 7: Environment and sustainability: Understand the impact of the professional engineering 
solutions in societal and environmental contexts, and demonstrate the knowledge of, and the need for 
sustainable development. 
PO 8: Ethics: Apply ethical principles and commit to professional ethics and responsibilities and 
norms of the engineering practice. 
PO 9: Individual and team work: Function effectively as an individual, and as a member or leader in 
diverse teams, and in multidisciplinary settings. 
PO 10: Communication: Communicate effectively on complex engineering activities with the 
engineering community and with the society at large, such as being able to comprehend and write 
effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and receive clear 
instructions. 
PO 11: Project management and finance: Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the 
engineering and management principles and apply these to one’s work, as a member and leader in a 
team, to manage projects and in multidisciplinary environments. 
PO 12: Life-long learning: Recognizes the need for, and have the preparation and ability to engage 
in independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of technological change. 
 
 
 
PROGRAM EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES (PEO): 
PEO 1: Create, analyze, assess, and implement resilient and secure cyber-physical systems to fulfil 
specified requirements. 
PEO 2: Recognized as effective professionals for their applied skills, problem solving capabilities 
and professional skills in the field of Cyber Security. 
PEO 3:  Pursue Higher Education and Research in emerging areas of Computer Sciences with a 
focus on Cyber Security.  
PROGRAM SPECIFIC OUTCOMES (PSO): 
After successful completion of the program the graduates will be able to: 
PSO 1: Demonstrate the knowledge of Computer Sciences and Cyber Security specially in the broad 
areas of Computer Programming, Database Management, Data Security, System Security and 
Network Security. 
PSO 2: Develop secure software with vulnerability assessment, and security requirements, designed 
with the least privileges for the protection of digital applications. 
PSO 3: Evaluate the function of cyber security by identifying the tools and systems to minimize the 
risk to an organization’s cyberspace. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS 
SCOPE: 
This Academic regulation provide a framework for the regulatory guidelines of all programs offered 
by The Apollo University. It includes procedures and practices that are to be followed to ensure 
academic standards in the University. The regulations are approved by the Academic Council. These 
regulations may be amended from time to time with the approval of the Academic council for the 
benefit of students or some times to reflect the changes suggested by the statutory bodies.  
Information regarding amendments (if any) to the regulations will be communicated to the students 
by publishing in the University website. Students must follow the amended regulations as they 
might impact the process for the award of degree. The decision of the Vice Chancellor shall be the 
final in case of any discrepancy. These regulations apply to all students, despite the program of study. 
 
1. ADMISSION INTO THE PROGRAM 
The University admits the students in two modes. One through the convenor quota as per the Andhra 
Pradesh Private Universities Act, for which the admissions will be carried out through the convener 
quota by the Govt of Andhra Pradesh. The other is through university quota for which the following 
procedure will be followed: 
A. The applicant shall satisfy the entrance requirements specified by The Apollo University and 
in accordance with guidelines of statutory councils for Under-graduation.  
B. The Applicant shall be qualified in the qualifying examination for a particular program. 
C. The Applicant secures a rank in national level entrance exam or suitable such test conducted 
by The Apollo University / professional body.  
D. The Applicant qualifies in the specified state or national level examinations prescribed by The 
Apollo University. 
The Apollo University will widely notify the counselling schedule for admissions into the academic 
programs in the media. The provisional admission will be given to the eligible students during the 
counseling scheduled by The Apollo University. The selected candidates will be provisionally 
admitted into the program of his/her choice if the candidate meets the program specific requirements 
in addition to academic performance qualifying exam. Admission is purely based on merit and so 
merely meeting the requirements will not ensure admission. The University does not discriminate 
based on gender, race, region, religion, disability or nationality.   The University reserves the right to 
make admissions based on various criteria which is specified in the admission brochure.   
2. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
Undergraduate programs  
The qualifying exam eligibility for each program is given Annexure 1. The student should have 
passed the qualifying exam either in the year the student is seeking admission or the previous year.  
Convener Quota: The student seeking admission to any program under convener quota shall qualify 
in the relevant entrance exam conducted by the Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
University Quota:  For getting admission under university quota, percentage of marks obtained in 
the qualifying exam, the rank obtained in TAU entrance exam or any recognized national level 
examination in the year of admission will be considered.  
Counselling 
All the eligible students need to apply for admission and have to attend counselling conducted by 
TAU as per the schedule for the university quota. 
3. PROGRAMS 
The Apollo University offers variety of programs which includes certificate, undergraduate, 
postgraduate, and Research.  The list of programs on offer for the academic year 2022-23  are 
annexed in Annexure 2 and those of 2023-24 are annexed in Annexure 3. 
Minimum duration of the program 
The minimum duration of each program depends on the type of program, viz., undergraduate, 
postgraduate, integrated programs, etc., and the faculty which offers the program. The maximum 
duration of the program is N+2 years, where N stands for the minimum duration of the program as 
mentioned in Annexure 2 and 3. If the student has not obtained the minimum number of credits 
within the stipulated time, the Vice-Chancellor may extend the maximum duration in extenuating 
circumstances upon receiving a request along with reasons from the student for not completing the 
program on time. 
4. CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM 
The choice-based credit system (CBCS) facilitates the education student-centric. It provides the 
opportunity for the learner to choose the courses from a basket of core, elective, and skill enhanced 
courses. All programs of study are designed to meet the specified number of credit requirements. The 
courses taken by the student in each semester as part of program are allotted some credit points based 
on the number of hours assigned. Upon successful completion of the course, the student secures the 
number of credits allotted for that course. Once the minimum number of credits of the program is 
achieved, the degree can be awarded, subject to fulfilment of all other relevant conditions. 
 
5. STRUCTURE OF THE PROGRAM 
The Program structure Consists of 
i) University Courses 
 A. University Core 
 B. University Electives 
ii) Faculty Courses 
 A. Faculty Core 
 B. Faculty Electives  
iii) Program Courses 
 A. Program Core 
 B. Program electives  
Each course* is assigned a certain number of credits depending upon the number of contact hours 
(lectures/tutorials/practical) per week.  (*one course means one subject) 
Core Courses = 3 Credits /4 Credits   Elective =3 Credits 
In general, credits are assigned to the courses as detailed below: 
• A classroom lecture/ tutorial of 60 min (1 hr) duration per week, spread over the entire 
semester, shall be considered as one credit.  
• A laboratory session of minimum of 120 min (2 hr) per week shall be considered as one 
credit.  
• A project work/ Internship session of 60 minutes (1 hr) carried out per week shall be 
considered as one credit. 
6. MEDIUM OF INSTRUCTION 
The medium of instruction (including examinations and project reports) shall be English. 
7. REGISTRATION 
Any of the following student must register for the courses opted in a particular semester during the 
scheduled registration period.  
i. a new student who enrolls into any program  
ii. an existing student who is continuing on rolls from the preceding regular semester  
iii. a former student, i.e., who has not enrolled in the preceding regular semester or who has 
availed academic break or detained and got readmission  
 
  
Each newly admitted student shall attend an induction/ orientation program prior to commencement 
of the first semester. During this program academic advisors assist the students in choosing the 
courses. Existing student may register online by using their registration number and mail ID through 
the Apollo ERP portal. Class schedules are available approximately two weeks before the beginning 
of every semester for each program. The concerned head of the department must approve class 
schedule.   
 
8. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS 
• Students should earn a minimum of 80% attendance in the current semester to become eligible 
to write the Semester End Examinations. 
• The monthly statement of attendance will be displayed on the Department Notice Board/ 
Apollo ERP by the respective departments within the first five working days of the following 
month. 
• Candidates who are falling short of 80% attendance will be detained on the recommendation 
of the HoD and are not eligible to appear for the current semester examinations. The students 
who are detained in the current semester will not be allowed to register for the next semester 
and they have to repeat the same semester by paying the tuition fee prescribed. However, they 
can write arrear subjects, if any.  
 
9. EVALUATION 
The assessment of the student’s performance in a Theory course shall be based on two components: 
Continuous Evaluation (40 marks) and Semester-end examination (60 marks). A student has to secure 
an aggregate of 40% in the course in the two components put together to be declared to have passed 
the course, subject to the condition that the candidate must have secured a minimum of 24 marks (i.e. 
40%) in the theory component at the semester-end examination. Practical/ Project Work/ Industrial 
Training/ Viva voce/ Seminar etc. are completely assessed under Continuous Evaluation for a 
maximum of 100 marks, and a student has to obtain a minimum of 50% to secure Pass Grade. For 
courses having both theory and practical components, 60% of the weightage will be given for theory 
component and 40% weightage for practical component. The student must secure 40% (Theory + 
Practical) with 24 marks minimum in theory to attain pass grade.  
Details of Assessment Procedure are furnished below in Table 1. 
  
Table 1: Assessment Procedure 
S. No. Component of 
Assessment 
Marks 
Allotted 
Type of 
Assessment 
Scheme of Evaluation 
1 Theory 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
Continuous 
Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Semester-end 
Examination 
i) Twenty (20) marks for mid 
examinations. Three mid examinations 
shall be conducted for 20 marks each; 
average of the best two performances shall 
be taken into consideration. 
ii) Ten (10) marks for Quizzes, 
Assignments and Presentations.  
iii) Ten (10) marks for   periodic 
evaluation, case studies and projects  
 
iv) Sixty (60) marks for Semester-end 
examinations 
 Total 100   
2 Laboratory 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
1)80 marks with equal weightage to all 
experiments subject to conduct of 
minimum of 10 experiments  
2)20marks for the end exam (with one of 
our university teachers as external other 
than course teacher) 
3 Internship 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
i) (80) marks for periodic evaluation  
of Internship report by the Project 
Supervisor. 
ii) Twenty (20) marks for final Report 
presentation and Viva-voce, by a panel of 
internal examiners. 
iii) Students shall undergo TWO 
internships during the course of time and 
the evaluation shall be done during final 
semester. 
4 Project work  100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
iv) (80) marks for periodic evaluation 
and technical report writing by the Project 
Supervisor. 
ii) Twenty (20) marks for final Report 
presentation and Viva-voce, by a panel of 
internal examiners 
5 Students Seminars  100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
Each student has to give a seminar on any 
topic in consultation with the faculty 
member in charge A detailed report shall 
be submitted to the in charge. 
60 marks for periodic evaluation including 
report preparation and 40 marks for viva 
voce by a panel of examiners. 
 
GRADING SYSTEM 
Based on the student performance during a given semester, a final letter grade will be awarded at the 
end of the semester in each course. The letter grades and the corresponding grade points are as given 
inTable2. 
Table 2: Grades & Grade Points 
  
Sl. No. Grade Grade Points Absolute Marks 
1 O(Outstanding) 10 90 and above 
2 A+(Excellent) 9 80 to 89 
3 A (Very Good) 8 70 to 79 
4 B+(Good) 7 60 to 69 
 
SEMESTER GRADE POINT AVERAGE (SGPA) 
A Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) for the semester will be calculated according to the 
formula: 
 
 𝑮𝑷𝑨=∑ [ 𝑪 𝑿 𝑮 ]
∑ 𝑪 
Where 
C=number of credits for the course, 
G=grade points obtained by the student in the course. 
A student who earns a minimum of 4 grade points (P grade) in a course is declared to have 
successfully completed the course, and is deemed to have earned the credits assigned to that course. 
CUMULATIVE GRADE POINT AVEARGE (CGPA) 
A similar formula is used to arrive at Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA), considering the 
student’s performance in all the courses taken in all the semesters up to the particular point of time. 
Table 3 shows the CGPA required for the award of class after the successful completion of the 
program. 
Table3: CGPA required for award of Class 
Class CGPA Required 
First Class with Distinction >8.0* 
First Class >6.5 
Second Class >5.5 
Pass Class >5.0 
 
5 B (Above Average) 6 50 to 59 
6 C(Average) 5 45 to 49 
7 P(Pass) 4 40 to 44 
8 F(Fail) 0 Less than 40 
9 Ab. (Absent) 0 - 
*In addition to the required CGPA of 8.0 or more, the student must have necessarily passed all the 
courses of every semester in first attempt. 
11. REAPPEARANCE 
a. A student who has secured ‘F’ grade in a Theory course shall have to reappear at the 
subsequent Semester end examination held for that course. 
b. A student who has secured ‘F’ grade in a Practical course shall have to attend Special 
Instruction Classes scheduled by the Department for securing pass. 
c. A student who has secured ‘F’ Grade in Internship /Project work / Industrial Training etc 
shall have to reappear for Viva – voce scheduled by the department. 
d. A student who is declared fail (F) in a course/s can apply for revaluation within one week 
from the date of publication of results with a fee prescribed by the university. The marks 
/grade awarded in the revaluation is final. 
 
11.1 PROCEDURE FOR REVALUATION 
• The students who have not satisfied with the marks awarded by the examiner can apply for 
revaluation of his/her answer script/s  
• The students have to apply through proper channel for revaluation and to pay the revaluation 
fee per paper to the university towards revaluation fee. 
• Students have to apply for revaluation within 7 days from the date publication of result. 
• The scripts will get valued by second examiner and if the difference is more than 15 marks, 
they will get valued by the third examiner. The average of the nearest two marks will be 
declared as the final marks. 
11.2 ASSESSMENT MECHANISM  
 The Apollo University offers a student the benefits of Choice Based Credit System. Every 
paper is allotted a certain number of credits as per the UGC norms. A student is awarded the 
specified credits on obtaining a pass in the respective paper. 
 
 The Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) has been adopted for UG Course from the year 
2021-22 onwards as per the recommendations of the A.P. State Council for Higher Education 
(APSCHE). The structure of undergraduate programmes provides a wide range of choice for 
students to opt for courses based on their eligibility, aptitude and career goals. 
  
11.3 SEMESTER END EXAMINATION 
The End semester examination will be a comprehensive examination of 3 hours duration. Two End 
Semester examinations are conducted in a year- 
Odd semester examinations in November/ December and  
Even semester examination in May/June  
Practical examination / Project viva will be held 2 weeks prior to the theory semester  
end examinations. 
Under-Graduation Programs  
Course 
Continuous Assessment 
Aggregate in 
End semester 
Examinations 
All UG Courses No passing minimum 
End semester 
40% 
• UG candidates may apply for re-totaling / revaluation of valued answer scripts, to the 
Controller of Examinations through the Heads of Departments and Principal / Dean, in 
the prescribed forms, remitting the prescribed fee within 7 days from the date of 
40% 
11.4 POST EVALUATION PROGRAMME:  
Under the Post Evaluation Programme there are three menus: 
• Provision for improvement 
• Re-totaling and Revaluation of answer scripts 
• Restrictions to appear for the examinations 
11.5 PROVISION FOR IMPROVEMENT 
A student who passes a paper in the first attempt can reappear for the same paper in the 
succeeding End-of-Semester examination only, for improving his/her marks. Re-appearance 
for improvement is allowed for theory and practical subjects of all semesters, except for the 
final semester subjects. Revised mark statement will be issued after withdrawing the previous 
one, if the marks obtained in improvement are higher than the marks awarded earlier. When 
there is no improvement, there shall not be any change in the original marks already awarded. 
The improved marks shall be considered for classification but not for ranking. 
Provision for Re-totaling and Revaluation of valued answer scripts 
publication of results. Revaluation of answer scripts is permissible only for the current 
semester papers and not for any arrear paper. 
• Those wish to apply for revaluation of final semester papers can do so within five days 
from the date of publication of results. In re-valuation, the answer papers will be 
valued by an external examiner and if there is a difference of 15 marks between the 
two evaluations then the script will be sent for third valuation which is final and the 
mark awarded by the third examiner   will be taken into the account. 
• Revised mark statement will be issued after withdrawing the previous one, if the 
marks obtained in revaluation / retotalling are higher than the marks obtained earlier. 
In other cases, the original marks obtained earlier will be retained and the matter will 
be intimated to the student concerned as ‘No change’. 
• A candidate who applies for revaluation should not apply for retotalling. 
 
Restrictions to appear for the examinations 
Candidates who fail in any of the papers in the UG End semester examinations shall complete the 
paper concerned within N+2 years from the date of admission to the particular course. If they fail to 
do so, they shall re-register their names and take the examination in the texts/revised 
regulations/syllabus of the paper prescribed for the subsequent batch of candidates, in force at the 
time of their reappearance.  In the event of removal of that paper consequent to change of regulation 
and/or curriculum after N+2 years period, the candidate shall have to take up an equivalent paper in 
the revised syllabus as suggested by the Chairman, Board of Studies concerned. 
12. BETTERMENT OF GRADES 
A student who has secured only a Pass or Second class and desires to improve his/her Class can 
appear for Betterment Examinations only in Theory courses of any Semester of his/her choice, 
conducted in Summer Vacation along with the Special Examinations. Betterment of Grades is 
permitted ‘only once’ immediately after completion of the program of study. 
13. DETENTION AND RE-ADMISSION 
If a student fails to meet the minimum attendance requirement or minimum standards for academic 
progression, the concerned academic head will recommend for detention and it will be notified by the 
concerned Dean of the School. The students who are detained in the current semester will not be 
allowed to register for the next semester and they have to repeat the same semester.   
  
The candidates who are detained or availed academic break or suspended in the previous 
semester/academic year and want to continue their study shall apply for re-admission to the 
university. The candidates shall request for re-admission to the respective Head of the Department, 
with details viz., Full Name, Registration Number, Department, School, Fee payment particulars with 
proofs and reasons for discontinuations. The concerned academic head will forward it to the Registrar 
with specific comments. The Registrar will notify the decision of re-admission which shall include 
the prescribed fee particulars, semester/ year into which readmission is granted and additional courses 
to be completed by the student (if any). The candidates should apply for re-admission in advance, that 
is before the commencement of the semester.   
 
14. GROOMING AND ATTIRE FOR STUDENTS  
Grooming and Etiquette is of great significance in the dynamic of shaping one’s Personality. The 
Apollo University stands by a Code of Grooming, Attire and Etiquette that promotes a professional 
standard: Academic Day; Campus Placements and Non-Academic Hours on Campus. 
The Dress Code to be in compliance on academic premises while attending: Formal Functions of the 
Institution / Lectures / Practicals / Dining Area / Library / Labs / Office Areas. 
Students shall follow appropriate attire during Academic and Non-Academic hours on  the campus. 
Students shall wear clean, neat, pressed and presentable clothing, and command respect by dressing 
in accordance with responsible personal norms. Students shall always wear The Apollo University ID 
Card with the Lanyard. 
 
 Grooming and Formal Wear - Boys: 
Formal Shirts / T-Shirts with a Collar should preferably be tucked in with a Formal pair of Pants 
Shoes and Socks to complete the Formal Attire. Personal Hygiene should be followed and Hair 
should be well groomed. 
Smart Casuals for Boys: 
Long Kurtas / Formals / Semi-Formal Shirts with Jeans. 
Grooming and Formal Wear - Girls: Sarees / Salwar Suits / Leggings or Jeggings with Long Kurtis / 
Long Frocks / Long Skirts / Palazzos. Complement the outfit with proper footwear. Personal Hygiene 
should be followed and Hair should be well groomed. 
Smart Casuals for Girls: 
Jeans with long Kurtis / Long Skirts / Long Frocks. 
Attire for Non-Academic Hours On Campus: 
The students should be neatly attired during Non-Academic Hours on Campus. 
DRESS CODE FOR BOYS: 
Jeans / Track Suits / T-Shirts / Trousers / Shirts. 
Dress Code for Girls: 
Jeans / T-Shirts or Blouses / Salwar Suits / Palazzos / Leggings or Jeggings with Long Tops / Sarees / 
Long Skirts / Track Suits. 
DO’S AND DO’NTS FOR BOYS AND GIRL STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY: 
• To wear modest clothing that reflects the essence of good personal grooming standards. 
• To refrain from wearing Sleeveless Clothing; Shorts; Short Tops, etc., 
 
PLEASE NOTE: The decision as to what constitutes Appropriate Attire vests with the Authorities of 
The Apollo University. 
 
15. ELIGIBILITY FOR AWARD OF THE DEGREE 
The undergraduate degree will be of 4-years of duration. A student shall be declared as eligible for 
the award of the degree if the candidate has successfully secured the minimum number of required 
credits as specified in the curriculum corresponding to the branch of his/her study within the 
stipulated time. 
After successful completion of the program, a provisional certificate cum memorandum of grades 
(PCMG) will be issued to the students. The PCMG includes the secured grades and class achieved in 
chosen program and specialization if any, along with grades and CGPA secured by the student. The 
original degree will be presented in the subsequent convocation.  
 
16. DISCRETION POWER 
Not with-standing anything contained in the above sections, the Vice Chancellor may review all 
exceptional cases, and give his decision, which will be final and binding. 
 
ANNEXURE 1 
ELIGIBILTY FOR QUALIFYING EXAM FOR UNDER GRADUATE PROGRAMS 
Program 
Type 
Program Name 
Eligibility 
Bachelor's B.Tech. 
Security 
CSE- Cyber 
Candidates must secure 50% in Physics, Chemistry and 
Mathematics of Intermediate or in the diploma course or 
must have appeared for Class 12 or equivalent 
examination with Physics, Chemistry, and Mathematics 
as major subjects from any recognized board. Candidates 
who have completed or qualified the final year of 
diploma in engineering courses and should attain 17 
Years as on 31st December of the preceding calendar 
year. 
Passed Minimum THREE years / TWO years (Lateral 
Entry) Diploma examination with at least 45% marks 
(40% marks in case of candidates belonging to reserved 
category) in ANY branch of Engineering and 
Technology.  
OR 
B.Tech. 
Security 
Bachelor's 
CSE-Cyber 
Passed B.Voc/3-year D.Voc. Stream in the same or 
allied sector.  
(The Universities will offer suitable bridge courses such 
as Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, etc., for 
the students coming from diverse backgrounds to 
achieve desired learning outcomes of the programme) 
(Lateral Entry to Second 
year) 
Passed B.Sc. Degree from a recognized University as 
defined by UGC, with at least 45% marks (40% marks in 
case of candidates belonging to reserved category) and 
passed 10+2 examination with Mathematics as a subject.  
OR 
ANNEXURE 2 
PROGRAMS OFFERED BY SCHOOL OF TECHNOLOGY 
FROM ACADEMIC YEAR 2022-23 
Sl. 
No. Program Expanded Level 
Minimum Duration 
in Years (N) 
1 
 
B. Tech. CSE 
Computer Science and 
Engineering Bachelor’s 4 
2. 
 
B. Tech. 
CSE (AI& DS) 
Computer Science and 
Engineering (Artificial 
Intelligence and Data 
Structures) 
Bachelor’s 4 
 
ANNEXURE 3 
PROGRAMS OFFERED BY SCHOOL OF TECHNOLOGY 
FROM ACADEMIC YEAR 2023-24 
 
Sl. 
No. Program Expanded Level 
Minimum Duration 
in Years (N) 
1 
 
B. Tech. CSE 
Computer Science and 
Engineering Bachelor’s 4 
2. 
 
B. Tech. 
CSE (AI& DS) 
Computer Science and 
Engineering (Artificial 
Intelligence and Data 
Structures) 
Bachelor’s 4 
3 
B. Tech. 
CSE (AI& ML) 
Computer Science and 
Engineering (Artificial 
Intelligence and Machine 
Learning) 
Bachelor’s 4 
4 B. Tech CSE 
(Cybersecurity) 
Computer Science and 
Engineering (Cybersecurity) Bachelor’s 4 
5 
B. Tech CSE 
(Software 
Engineering) 
Computer Science and 
Engineering (Cybersecurity) 
with Kalvium  
Bachelor’s 4 
6 M. Tech (VLSI 
design & ES) 
Master of Technology in 
Very Large-Scale 
Integration design and 
Embedded Systems 
Masters 2 
 
 
 
 
 I - Semester  
 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
 
 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week  
L  
T  
P 
BTST1701 Engineering Physics 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST1702 Engineering Mathematics 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST1801 Problem Solving and Programming with C 3 1 0 4 4 
TAUT1101 Communicative English (University Core – I) 3 0 0 3 3 
 University Elective I 3 0 0 3 3 
BTSL1701 Engineering Physics Lab 0 0 3 1.5 3 
 
BTSL1801 Problem Solving and Programming with C 
Lab 
 
0  
0  
3  
1.5 
 
3 -- IT Work shop 0 0 0 0 1 -- Design Thinking 0 0 0 0 1 -- Soft Skills 0 0 0 0 1 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Technical Seminar 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- Co-curricular activity 0 0 0 0 1 -- Self-Learning 0 0 0 0 1 
 
TOTAL  
15  
3  
6  
21  
36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University Elective – I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. No Name of the Course Host Department 
1 Basics of Physiotherapy School of Health Sciences – Physiotherapy 
2 Biostatistics School of Health Sciences – BMS & GMB 
3 Constitution of India School of Social Sciences 
4 Ethical Hacking School of Technology - CSE 
5 Fundamentals of Computers School of Technology - CSE 
6 Gender and Development School of Social Sciences 
7 Leadership Development School of Management 
8 Mathematical Thinking School of Technology 
9 Nursing Apollo Institute of Nursing 
10 One Health School of Health Sciences – PH 
11 Basic emergency care and life support 
skills  
School of Health Sciences – AHS 
12 Basics of Health Management  School of Health Sciences – AHS 
13 Entrepreneurship School of Management 
14 Managerial Economics School of Management 
15 Organic Farming School of Health Sciences – BMS & GMB 
16 Personality Development School of Health Sciences – Psychology 
17 Social Entrepreneurship School of Management 
II - Semester  
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
 
 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
BTST1703 Probability & Statistics 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST1802 Basic Electrical and Electronics Engineering 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST1301 Data Structures 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST1302 Python Programming 3 1 0 4 4 
TAUT1102   Environmental Studies (University Core - II) 3 0 0 0 3 
 University Elective II 3 0 0 3 3 
 
BTSL1802 Basic Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
Lab 
 
0  
0  
2  
1 
 
2 
BTSL1301 Data Structures Lab 0 0 2 1 2 
BTSL1302 Python Programming Lab 0 0 2 1 2 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Co-curricular activity 0 0 0 0 1 -- Self-Learning 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 
 
TOTAL  
18  
4  
6  
22  
36 
University Elective – II 
Semester – II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
S. No Name of the Course 
Indian Languages 
1 Telugu  
2 Tamil 
3 Hindi 
4 Professional English 
Foreign Languages 
5 French 
6 German 
7 Spanish 
8 Japanese 
III - Semester  
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
 
 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week  
L  
T  
P 
BTST2701 Mathematical Foundations of Cyber Security 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST2301 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST2302 Object Oriented Programming through Java 3 0 0 3 3 
BTST2801 Digital Logic Design 3 0 0 3 3 
TAUT2101   Health and Wellness (University Core – III) 3 0 0 3 3 
 University Elective -III 3 0 0 3 3 
BTST2303 Constitution of India 3 0 0 0 3 
BTSL2301 Java Programming Lab 0 0 2 1 2 
BTSL2801 Digital Logic Design Lab 0 0 2 1 2 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Co-curricular activity 0 0 0 0 1 -- Self-Learning 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- Soft Skills Training 0 0 0 0 1 -- Certification course 0 0 0 0 1 
TOTAL 22 2 6 22 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University Elective – III 
Semester – III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. No Name of the Course Host Department  
1 Community Engagement School of Social Sciences 
2 Clinical Nutrition School of Health Sciences – 
BMS & GMB 
3 Emotional Intelligence & Mental Health School of Health Sciences – 
Psychology 
4 Human Rights School of Social Sciences 
5 Industry 4.0 School of Technology – CSE 
6 Medical Terminology School of Health Sciences – 
BMS & GMB 
7 Social Network Analysis School of Health Sciences – 
PH 
8 Antibiotic Resistance & Biomedical Waste 
Management 
School of Health Sciences – 
AHS 
9 Behavior Change Communication School of Health Sciences – 
PH 
10 Disability Management School of Health Sciences – 
Psychology 
11 Disaster Management School of Social Sciences 
12 Human Values & Professional Ethics School of Social Sciences 
13 Infection Prevention & Control School of Health Sciences – 
AHS 
14 NSS & Youth Development School of Social Sciences 
IV- Semester  
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
 
 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week  
L  
T  
P 
BTST2702 Discrete Mathematics and Graph Theory 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST2901 Management for Engineers 3 0 0 3 3 
BTST2304 Database Management Systems 3 1 0 3 4 
BTST2305 Operating Systems 3 1 0 4 4 
BTST2306 Software Engineering 3 0 0 3 3 
BTST2501 Computer Networks 3 0 0 3 3 
BTST2307 Universal Human Values 3 0 0 0 3 
BTSL2302 Database Management Systems Lab 0 0 2 1 2 
BTSL2501 Computer Networks Lab 0 0 2 1 2 -- Internship – I* will be Evaluated in VIII 
Sem - - - - - -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Aptitude and Logical Reasoning  0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- Technical Seminar 0 0 0 0 1 
TOTAL 21 3 4 22 36 
 
*Internship -I slot is scheduled during summer break
Value Added Courses 
Course Code Course Name 
BTSA0001 Getting Started with Google Cloud Learning Path 
BTSA0002 Fundamentals of Data Analytics 
BTSA0003 Introduction to Blockchain Technology 
BTSA0004 Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Architect 
 
V- Semester  
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
 
 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
BTST3501 Artificial Intelligence 3 0 0 3 3 
BTST3502 Cryptography and Network Security 3 0 0 3 3 
BTST3301 Automata and Compiler Design 3 1 0 4 4 -- Faculty Elective – I 3 0 0 3 3 -- Program Elective -I 3 0 0 3 3 
BTSM3501 MOOC – I 0 0 0 3 3 
BTST3901 Entrepreneurship and Start up Management 3 0 0 0 3 
BTSL3501 Artificial Intelligence Lab 0 0 2 1 2 
BTSL3502 Cryptography and Network Security Lab 0 0 2 1 2 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- CRT  0 0 0 0 4 
TOTAL 18 1 4 21 36 
 
 
Faculty Elective -I Program Elective -I 
Course 
Code 
 
Course Name Course 
Code 
 
Course Name 
 
SOTT3401a Object Oriented Analysis and 
Design 
 
BTST3601a  
Data Privacy 
SOTT3401b Software Engineering BTST3601b Distributed Computing 
 
SOTT3401c  
Artificial Intelligence  
BTST3601c Advanced Java 
Programming 
 
SOTT3401d Computer Organization and 
Architecture 
 
BTST3601d  
Malware Analysis 
SOTT3401e Linux Programming BTST3601e Database Security 
SOTT3401f Advanced Data Structures  
SOTT3401g Data Warehousing and Mining 
SOTT3401h Machine Learning 
 
 
SOTT3401i Differential Equations and Vector 
Calculus 
SOTT3401j Numerical Methods for Engineers 
 
SOTT3401k Mathematical Foundations of 
Cyber Security 
SOTT3401l Information Retrieval Systems 
 
SOTT3401m Cryptography and Network 
Security 
 
SOTT3401n Principles of Programming 
Languages 
SOTT3401o Unix and Shell Programming 
SOTT3401p Introduction to Psychology 
SOTT3401q Industry 4.O 
SOTT3401r Computer Vision 
 
 
Value Added Courses 
Course Code Course Name 
BTSA0005 Database Engineer Learning Path 
BTSA0006 Big Data Foundation Course 
BTSA0007 Programming Basics for Blockchain Engineers 
BTSA0008 Oracle Cloud Security Administrator 
 
 
 
 
  
  
VI - Semester  
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
BTST3503 Full Stack Web Development 3 0 0 3 3 
BTST3504 Cyber Security 3 0 0 3 3 -- Faculty Elective-II 3 0 0 3 3 -- Program Elective -II 3 0 0 3 3 -- Program Elective -III 3 0 0 3 3 
BTSM3502 MOOC – II 0 0 0 3 3 
BTSL3503 Full Stack Web Development Lab 0 0 2 1 2 
BTSL3504 Cyber Security Lab 0 0 2 1 2 -- Internship – II* will be Evaluated in VIII 
Sem - - - - - -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- Valued added courses 0 0 0 0 2 -- Seminar 0 0 0 0 1 -- Technical Training 0 0 0 0 3 -- Self-Learning 0 0 0 0 2 
TOTAL 
 
 
 
 
Internshi
p -I slot  
 
is 
schedule
d during 
summer 
break 
15 0 4 20 36 
*Internship -II slot is scheduled during summer break 
 
 
  Faculty Elective -II Program Elective -II 
Course 
Code 
 
Course Name Course 
Code 
 
Course Name 
SOTT3402a Design Patterns BTST3602a Deep Learning 
SOTT3402b Cyber Security BTST3602b Intrusion Detection Systems 
SOTT3402c Software Project Management BTST3602c Internetworking with TCP/ IP 
SOTT3402d Agile Software Development BTST3602d IOT Security 
SOTT3402e Cloud Computing BTST3602e Database Administration 
SOTT3402f Mobile Computing Program Elective -III 
SOTT3402g Image Processing BTST3603a Software Project Management 
SOTT3402h Deep Learning BTST3603b High Performance Computing 
SOTT3402i E-Commerce BTST3603c MERN Technologies 
 
SOTT3402j  
Block Chain Technology  
BTST3603d Applications of AI and ML in 
Cyber 
Security  
SOTT3402k Mathematical Foundations of 
Data Science 
 
BTST3603e  
Mobile Security 
 
SOTT3402l Transforms and Boundary Value 
Problems 
 
SOTT3402m Optimization Techniques 
SOTT3402n Information Security 
SOTT3402o Ethical Hacking 
SOTT3402p Internet of Things 
SOTT3402q Embedded Systems 
SOTT3402r Green Computing 
SOTT3402s Cloud Security 
SOTT3402t DevNet 
SOTT3402u Advanced Computer Networks 
SOTT3402v Network Security 
SOTT3402w Fault Tolerant Systems 
SOTT3402x Computational Intelligence 
SOTT3402y Data Analytics with Tableau 
SOTT3402z Human Computer Interaction 
 
Value Added Courses 
Course Code Course Name 
BTSA0009 Network Engineer Learning Path 
BTSA0010 BDA Foundation 
BTSA0011 Blockchain Essentials 
BTSA0012 Oracle Cloud Operations Engineer 
VII - Semester  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
 
BTST4501 Cybercrime Investigation and Digital 
Forensics 
 
3  
0  
0  
3  
3 
BTST4502 Big Data Analytics 3 0 0 3 3 -- Program Elective -IV 3 0 0 3 3 -- Program Elective -V 3 0 0 3 3 
BTSM4501 MOOC - III 0 0 0 3 3 
BTSP4501 Mini Project 0 0 2 1 2 
BTSL4501 Digital Forensics Lab 0 0 2 1 2 
BTSL4502 Big Data Analytics Lab 0 0 2 1 2 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- Valued added courses 0 0 0 0 1 -- Seminar 0 0 0 0 1 -- Technical Training 0 0 0 0 6 -- Technical Paper Writing 0 0 0 0 1 
TOTAL 12 0 10 18 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Value Added Courses 
Program Elective -IV Program Elective -V 
Course 
Code 
 
Course Name Course 
Code 
 
Course Name 
BTST4601a Digital Twin BTST4602a Security Assessment and Risk Analysis 
 
BTST4601b  
Information Security  
BTST4602b Block Chain Security and 
Performances 
 
BTST4601c  
Mobile Application Security  
BTST4602c Digital Watermarking and 
Steganography 
 
BTST4601d Data Analytics for Fraud 
Detection 
 
BTST4602d  
Healthcare Analytics 
BTST4601e Threat Intelligence BTST4602e Operating System Security 
Course Code Course Name 
BTSA0013 Security Engineer Learning Path 
BTSA0014 Big Data Technology 
BTSA0015 Certified Blockchain Developer 
 
VIII - Semester 
 
 
#Internship-I during the IV semester and Internship-II during the VI semester are posted in 
the VIII semester.  
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
 
 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week  
L  
T  
P 
BTMP4502 Project Work 0 0 24 12 24 
BTSI3501 Internship-I Evaluation# 0 0 0 2 0 
BTSI4501 Internship – II Evaluation# 0 0 0 2 0 
TOTAL 0 0 24 16 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I SEMESTER 
BTST1701: ENGINEERING PHYSICS L  T  P  C 
 
3   1  0   4 
 
Course Description: 
Engineering Physics is a course made for those keen on research as well as engineering at the 
same time. It clubs together with the fields of Engineering as well as applied sciences and 
creates a course that helps one gain collective knowledge of the new concepts in the field of 
physics while also studying and researching their applications at the same time. Engineering 
Physics course allows you to pursue a wide range of topics at the same time, thus giving you 
several different options for a career. Being extremely vast and technical, the Engineering 
Physics course is a much-respected degree that stands apart from other engineering degrees 
and can be extremely rewarding at the same time. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Introducing fundamental concepts of physics that helps student understand intricacies of    
physical world around us. 
2. Introducing Quantum aspects of nature starting from the Newtonian Mechanics and wave 
concepts of nature, with the help of explanations from ground breaking experiments of 20th 
Century. 
3. Introducing general Optical phenomena basing on wave nature of electromagnetic radiation. 
4. Introducing various applications of quantum mechanics such as LASERs, Fibre Optics and 
Semiconductors devices. 
5. Introducing the applications of semiconductors in the modern era. 
 
UNIT I Mechanics, waves and Oscillations                                                                  20 Hrs 
 
Newton Laws & Equations of Motion, Momentum, Energy, Angular Momentum, Rigid Body 
Motion, Periodic Motion & Superposition, Free and Forced Vibrations, Resonance and 
Coupled Oscillators. 
 
 
 
UNIT II Concepts of Quantum Mechanics                                                                     8 Hrs 
 
Particle properties of waves, Wave properties of particles, Atomic Structure, Schrödinger’s 
Equation, Particle in a Box, Finite Potential Well, Quantum Harmonic Oscillator. 
 
 
UNIT III Statistical Mechanics                                                                                        8 Hrs 
Statistical Distributions, Maxwell-Boltzmann Statistics, Molecular energies in an Ideal Gas 
Quantum Statistics, Applications of Statistical mechanics. 
 
 
UNIT IV Optics                                                                                                               16 Hrs 
Wave Optics: Electro Magnetic Radiation and Electro Magnetic Spectrum, Super Position of 
Waves, Refraction, Reflection, Interference, Diffraction and Polarisation. 
LASERS: Characteristics of LASER, Spontaneous and Stimulated Emission of Radiation, 
Einstein’s  Coefficients  and  their  significance.  Meta-stable  State,  Pumping,  Population 
Inversion. Ruby  Laser, Helium-Neon  Laser,  Semiconductor  Diode Laser, Applications  of 
Lasers. 
Fiber Optics: Principle and construction of optical fibre, Acceptance Angle and Numerical 
Aperture, Classification of Optical Fibers, Attenuation in Optical Fibers (scattering, absorption 
andbending losses) Applications of Optical Fibers. 
 
 
UNIT V Semiconductors and Semiconductor devices 8 Hrs 
Semiconductors Fermi Level in Intrinsic and Extrinsic Semiconductors. Carrier concentration 
of Intrinsic Semiconductor. Carrier concentration of Extrinsic Semiconductor (qualitative). 
Semiconductor devices - Formation of a PN Junction and working of a PN Junction diode, 
Energy band Diagram of open circuited PN Diode, I-V Characteristics of PN Junction diode. 
Applications: LED, Solar Cell and Photo diode. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. The problem-solving capabilities. 
2. Quantitative aspects of wave and vibrations and its importance in understanding light. 
3. Understanding of the statistical distributions and some simple thermodynamic applications 
4. Understanding preliminary concepts of Quantum nature and how it give birth to 
modern engineering. 
5. Analyse the functionalities of the semiconductor devices. 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   B.K. Pandey &amp; S. Chaturvedi Engineering Physics, Cengage Learning. 
2.   Avadhanulu M N., Kshirsagar P G, A text book of Engineering Physics, S Chand 
publications Pvt. Ltd, 2014. 
3.   D.K Bhattacharya and Poonam Tandon, Engineering Physics, Oxford Higher 
Education press, 2015. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   P K Palanisamy, Engineering Physics, Sitech Publications. 
2.   Charles Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, John Wiley Publisher. 
3.   A.S. Vasudeva, Modern engineering Physics, S Chand. 
4.   Dekker, Solid State Physics. 
BTST1702: ENGINEERING MATHEMATICS L  T  P  C 
 
3   1  0   4 
 
Course Description: 
This course is about the basic mathematics that is fundamental and essential component in all 
streams of undergraduate studies in sciences and engineering. The course consists of topics in 
matrices, quadratic forms, mean value theorems, multivariable calculus and multiple integrals 
with applications to various engineering problems. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1.   Instruct the concept of Matrices in solving linear algebraic equations, Eigen values and 
Eigen vectors. 
2.   Familiarize the techniques in quadratic forms. 
3.   The maxima and minima of functions of single and several variables. 
4.   Illuminate the students in the concept of finding areas and volumes. 
5.   Equip the students with standard concepts and tools at an intermediate to advanced level 
mathematics to develop the confidence and ability among the students to handle various 
real-world problems and their applications. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                             12 Hrs 
Matrices: Rank of a matrix by echelon form, system of homogeneous and non-homogeneous 
linear equations. Eigen values, Eigen vectors of Matrices, Cayley-Hamilton theorem (without 
proof), finding inverse and power of a matrix by Cayley-Hamilton theorem. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                            12 Hrs 
Quadratic forms: Symmetric matrix, Orthogonal matrices, Diagonalisation of a matrix by 
orthogonal process. Quadratic forms and nature of the quadratic forms, reduction of quadratic 
form to canonical forms by orthogonal transformation. 
 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                          12 Hrs 
Mean value theorems: Rolle’s Theorem, Lagrange’s mean value theorem, Cauchy’s mean 
value theorem, Taylor’s and Maclaurin theorems with remainders (without proof); Properties 
and Problems. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                          12 Hrs 
Multivariable calculus: Partial derivatives, total derivatives, chain rule, change of variables, 
Jacobians, maxima and minima of functions of two variables, method of Lagrange multipliers. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                            12 Hrs 
Multiple integrals: Double integrals, change of order of integration, double integration in 
polar coordinates, areas enclosed by plane curves. Evaluation of triple integrals, change of 
variables between Cartesian and spherical polar co-ordinates. 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Analyse the solutions of the system of linear equations and find the Eigen values and 
Eigen vectors of a matrix, which are used to analyse the long-term behaviour of any 
system. 
2.   Reduce the quadratic form to canonical form using orthogonal transformations. 
3.   Utilize mean value theorems to real life problems. 
4.   Familiarize with functions of several variables, which is useful in optimization. 
5.   Evaluate multiple integrals in various coordinate systems. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   E. Kreyszig, Advanced engineering mathematics”, John wiley & Son’s publishers, New 
edition. 
2.   B. S. Grewal,” Higher engineering mathematics”, Khanna publishers, New edition. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   R. K. Jain and S. R. K. Iyengar, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 3/e, Alpha 
Science International Ltd., 2002. 
2.   George B. Thomas, Maurice D. Weir and Joel Hass, Thomas Calculus, 13/e, Pearson 
Publishers, 2013. 
3.   Glyn James, Advanced Modern Engineering Mathematics, 4/e, Pearson 
publishers, 2012. 
BTST1801: PROBLEM SOLVING AND PROGRAMMING WITH  C L  T  P  C 
 
3  1  0  4 
 
COURSE DESCRIPTION: 
The course is designed to provide complete knowledge of C language, improves logical skills 
which will help to create programs, applications in C and by learning the basic programming 
constructs they can easily switch over to any other language in future. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1.   Familiarize the environment of structured programming and enabling to build logic with 
algorithms and flowcharts. 
2.   Know the concepts of evaluation of expressions, conditional branching and loops. 
3.   Understand the features, train the student to convert the logic into program using a top- 
down approach. 
4.   Apply the concepts like, arrays and pointers in solving the real-world problems. 
5.   Demonstrate the concepts of structure, union and file handling operations. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                              10 Hrs 
Introduction to Computers and Problem Solving: What is computer, Introduction to 
components of a computer: Hardware, Software, Programming Language Types, Compiler, 
Problem Solving Aspect, Top-Down Design. 
Idea  of  Algorithm:  steps  to  solve  logical  and  numerical  problems.  Representation  of 
Algorithm, Flowchart with examples. 
From algorithms to programs: source code, variables, data types and memory locations, 
Syntax and Logical Errors in compilation, object and executable code 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                            13 Hrs 
History of C language, Characteristics of C language, C Character Set, C Tokens, Input-Output 
Statements, Structure of C Program, Arithmetic expressions, Operator Precedence & 
Associativity, Conditional Branching and Loops, Writing and evaluation of conditionals and 
consequent branching and Jumping Constructs, Iteration and loops. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                           12 Hrs 
Function: Functions (including using built in libraries), Parameter passing in functions, call 
by value, passing arrays to functions: idea of call by reference, Storage Classes. 
Recursion, Example programs: Finding Factorial, Fibonacci series, Ackermann function. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                           13 Hrs 
Arrays: Arrays (1-D, 2-D), Character arrays and strings 
Pointers: Idea of pointers, Defining pointers, Use of Pointers in self-referential structures, 
notation of linked list (no implementation), Dynamic Memory allocation Functions. 
UNIT V                                                                                                                             12 Hrs 
Structures: Defining structures and Array of Structures, Nested Structures, enum, typedef, 
Union. 
File handling: File Handling Functions, File Modes, File Operations. 
 
SSSSS 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1.   Formulate  simple  algorithms  for  arithmetic,  logical  problems  and  to  translate  the 
algorithms to programs (in C language) 
2.   Test and execute the programs and correct syntax and logical errors, to implement 
conditional branching, iteration. 
3.   Decompose a problem into functions and synthesize a complete program using divide and 
conquer approach. 
4.   Use arrays, pointers to formulate algorithms and programs for real-world problems. 
5.   Apply  programming  to  solve  the  problems  of  storing  different  data’s  and  various 
operations on files. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   E. Balaguruswamy, Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
2.   Computer science, a structured programming approach using C, B.A. Forouzan and R.F. 
Gilberg, Third edition, Thomson. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   R.G. Dromey, ―How to Solve it by Computer‖, Low Price Edition, Pearson Education 
India, 2008. 
2.   The  C  Programming  Language,  B.W.  Kernighan,  Dennis  M.  Ritchie,  PHI/Pearson 
Education. 
3.   Let us C by Yashwanth P. Kanetkar 8th edition BPB publication 
TAUT1101                        COMMUNICATIVE ENGLISH                                       L T P C 
                                                                                                                                          3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The creation of the Course is to facilitate Stakeholders in productively using the Language to 
functional advantage to form meaningful engagements in a social context and influence their 
professional dynamic. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To expand and enhance vocabulary systematically for clear communication, richer 
expression, and deeper comprehension across various contexts." 
2. To provide the grammatical knowledge and skills necessary to communicate effectively in 
English, both orally and in writing. 
3. To strengthen their ability to write academic papers, essays and summaries using the 
“Mind Mapping,’ dynamic. 
4. To enhance communication skills by analyse, evaluate, and express their opinions on 
various topics, fostering the development of critical thinking abilities 
5. To develop proficiency in listening, speaking, reading and writing, enabling individuals to 
communicate effectively in various real-life situations. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Vocabulary and Reading: Special Features of English Vocabulary, Reading With Purpose; 
Understanding What is Read; Drawing a Conclusion Based on Inferences, Deduction, Reading 
Between the Lines, Context, Connotation, Higher Order Thinking; How to Explain Specific 
Information with Clarity; Defining and Giving Reasons; Giving Directions; Professional 
Vocabulary.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Basic Grammar: Subject-Verb Agreement; Verb Tenses; Active-Passive Voice; Direct and 
Indirect Speech; Question Tags; Degrees of Comparison; Articles; Avoiding Jargon. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Writing: Letter Writing; Report Writing; E-Communication, Drafting and Collating Key 
Information, Taking Notes from Lectures, Reading Materials, Reporting on Minutes of the 
Meeting, Precis Writing 
  
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Basics of Communication: Role of Communication; Purpose of Communication; Barriers to 
Communication; Verbal and Non-Verbal Communication, Communication at the Workplace; 
Human Needs and Communication; “Mind Mapping” Communication; E-Communication. 
  
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Presentations: Self-Introduction; Individual Presentation; Group Discussions; Debates. 
  
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to: 
1. To review grammatical structures of English and the use of these forms in specific 
communicative contexts, which include: class activities, homework assignments, reading 
of texts and writing and functional real-world facets. 
2. To improve their accuracy and fluency in producing and understanding spoken and 
written English and endorse this proficiency in both personal and professional realms. 
3. To attain and enhance competence in the four modes of literacy: Writing, Speaking, 
Reading and Listening. 
4. To develop their ability as critical thinkers. 
5. To empower the individuals to connect, engage, and thrive in diverse personal and 
professional environments. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Meenakshi Raman and Sangeeta Sharma, “Technical Communication: Principles and Practice”, 
3rd Edition, Oxford University Press, 2015. 
2. M. Ashraf Rizvi, “Effective Technical Communication”, Second Edition, McGraw. Hill Education, 
2017. 
3. Wilfred Funk and Norman Lewis, “30 Days to a More Powerful Vocabulary”, Latest Edition, 
Pocket Books, 2021. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Grant Taylor, “English Conversation Practice”, Tata McGraw-Hill Education India, 2016. 
2. Gary Blake and Robert W. Bly, “The Elements of Technical Writing”, 2nd Edition, 2000, 
Longman. 
3. Raymond Murphy, “English Grammar in Use”, Fourth Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
2019. 
 
 
 
TAUT1201A                                BASICS OF PHYSIOTHERAPY                   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                             3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to aim at imparting a basic level health program. This program is 
formulated to enable student to gain adequate knowledge, skills and leading to an ability to 
identify the basics of early features of the health issues 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. Gather and interpret information within a holistic framework pertaining to health. 
2. The overall content of the curriculum focuses on health care and clinical education 
experiences for each student 
3. Understand the basic fundamentals of physiotherapy 
4. Familiarizes participants with different procedures and techniques used in physiotherapy 
and their practical application across various conditions 
5. Provide participants with a substantial understanding of physiotherapy and promote safe 
practices and ethical behaviour in physiotherapy practice. 
 
UNIT-I Basics of Physiotherapy                                                  5 Hrs 
i. What is Physiotherapy? 
ii. Types of Physiotherapy 
iii. Benefits of Physiotherapy 
iv. Why is Physiotherapy done? 
UNIT-II Women’s Health                                                              5 Hrs 
i. Pre natal exercises & Care 
ii. Post Natal exercises  
 
UNIT-III Acute injuries & management and the uses of Orthotics & Prosthetics      10 Hrs 
i. Mechanism of injury 
ii. Acute muscle injuries 
iii.      -Muscle strain 
iv.      -Risks of muscle strain 
v.      -Muscle imbalance:  
vi.      -Muscle inflexibility: 
vii. Ligament sprain and difference between sprain and strain 
viii. Orthotics & Prosthetics                                            
UNIT-IV Ergonomics & Health and Aerobics                               13 Hrs 
i. work-related musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs). 
ii. Risk factors associated with work-related MSDs & Possible Causes 
iii. Common ergonomic symptoms  
iv. Different types of Ergonomics & principles of ergonomics and v. Ergonomic 
Control Methods 
v. Awkward body postures – hazards 
vi. Physical Activity and exercise  
vii. Physical Fitness and Maximum Oxygen Consumption 
  
viii. Aerobic Exercise Training and Physiological Response to Aerobic Exercise 
ix. Cardiovascular Response to Exercise and Respiratory Response to Exercise  
x. Responses Providing Additional Oxygen to Muscle and Exercise Program  
i. Warm-Up Period, Aerobic Exercise Period and Cool-Down Period Application 
 
UNIT-V Education & Awareness about common diseases and BLS               12 Hrs 
i. Bell’s palsy 
ii. Diabetes 
iii. Coronary artery heart disease 
iv. OA Knee 
v. Stroke 
vi. LBA  
vii. Early identification of congenital anomalies  
viii. BLS Theory 
ix. BLS Practical’s 
 
Course Outcomes:  
1. Gain the basic knowledge of Physiotherapy 
2. Familiarize the procedures and techniques used in physiotherapy 
3. Protect   and manage from the sport injuries  
4. Gain Knowledge about Ergonomics  
5. To maintain physical fitness 
 
Text Books: 
1. Physiotherapy In Obstetrics And Gynecology-Polden And Mantle,Jaypee Brothers 
2. Women’s Health- Ruth Sapsford, Lippincott,1998 
3. Textbook of orthopedics medicine Vol I & II by James Cyriax – Bailliere 
4. Susan B O'Sullivan, Physical Rehabilitation 6th Edition, 6 edition F A Davis; 2013. 
ISBN-13: 978-0803625792 
5. Arias” Practical Guide To High Risk Pregnancy And Delivery By Amarnath 
Bhide,Sabaratnam Arulkumaran 
 
Reference Books: 
1. John Ebenezer- Essentials of Orthopedics for Physiotherapists- 3rd  edition 2016 
2. Davidson’s principles and practice of  medicine 
3. Fundamentals of Ergonomics in Theory and Practice- Alan Hedge- 2019 
4. Introduction to Ergonomics, Third Edition" -Robert Bridger- 2018 
5. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Practice: Improving System Performance and 
Human Well-Being"- Steven Shorrock, Claire Williams- 2020 
6. Acute Care Handbook for Physical Therapists- Jaime C. Paz, Michele P. West- 2019 
7. Sports Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation: Integrating Medicine and Science for 
Performance Solutions" David Joyce, Daniel Lewindon- 2015 
8. Orthotic Intervention for the Hand and Upper Extremity: Splinting Principles and 
Process"- Marylyn A. Jacobs, Noelle M. Austin- 2013 
9. Prosthetics and Orthotics: Lower Limb and Spine"- Joan E. Edelstein, Alex Moroz- 
2017 
10. "Essentials of Physiotherapy”- Prakash Narain Tandon- 2016 
11. Pathology for the Physical Therapist Assistant - Catherine C. Goodman, Kenda S. 
Fuller- 2020 (3rd Edition) 
 
 
TAUT1201B                                                 BIOSTATICS            L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
Biostatistics is the application of statistical methods to biological and health-related fields. This 
course provides a comprehensive introduction to the principles and techniques of biostatistics 
essential for conducting research in medicine, public health, and biology. Students will learn 
how to effectively collect, analyze, and interpret data from biological and health sciences, with 
a focus on understanding and addressing key issues such as experimental design, sampling 
methods, data visualization, hypothesis testing, and regression analysis. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Gain a solid understanding of biostatistical principles including descriptive statistics, 
probability, hypothesis testing, and regression analysis. 
2. Apply these principles to analyze data from biological and health sciences, focusing on 
experimental and observational studies. 
3. Critically interpret statistical results and effectively communicate findings to different 
audiences. 
4. Develop proficiency in using statistical software for data manipulation, analysis, and 
visualization. 
5. Design studies, evaluate literature, and collaborate in interdisciplinary teams, preparing for 
advanced study and research in biostatistics and related fields. 
 
UNIT-I Descriptive methods                9 Hrs 
Frequency Distribution, Characteristics of a Frequency Distribution, Tabular and Graphical 
Presentation of Data: Line Graphs, Bar Charts, Histograms, Ogives. 
 
UNIT-II Measures of central tendency                9 Hrs 
Arithmetic Mean, Median, Mode, Position of Averages, Selection of the Appropriate Measure 
of Central Tendency, Geometric Mean, Harmonic Mean. 
 
UNIT-III Measures of dispersion                            9 Hrs 
Range, Interquartile Range, Mean Deviation, Variance and Standard Deviation 
 
UNIT-IV Sampling Designs                9 Hrs 
Sampling and Sample Designs, Significance of Probability and Non-probability sampling 
methods, Crossover Design, Case Control Design, Cohort Study Design, Designing clinical 
trials ‐ Single‐ and Double‐Blind Experiments. 
 
UNIT-V Data analysis and interpretation                9 Hrs 
Tests of hypothesis, Tests of significance, chi‐square test, Goodness of fit, Analysis of variance. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Ability to design experiments, sampling variables, analyze the biological data, 
interpret and present the results in meaningful way. 
2. Create tables and graphs for data presentation 
3. Describe measures of central tendency and dispersion along with calculating 
probability features of experiments. 
4. Discuss the correlation between various types of data along with associated variables. 
5. Test hypothesis and carry out related statistical tests 
 
  
Text Books: 
1. Daniel WW, Cross CL (2013) Biostatistics: A Foundation Sciences 
2. Biostatistics: A Foundation for Analysis in the Health Sciences, 11th Edition Chad L. 
Cross, Wayne W. Daniel , ISBN: 978-1-119-49657-1, December 2018 
 
Reference Books 
1. Forthofer RN, Lee ES, Hernandez M (2006) To Design, Analysis, and Discovery. 
Elsevier Ltd., Amsterdam. 
2. Principles of Biostatistics, 3rd Edition, By Marcello Pagano, Kimberlee Gauvreau, 
Heather Mattie (2022). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201C                                       CONSTITUTION OF INDIA                   L T PC 
                                                                                                                                             3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Constitution of India course provides a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental 
principles, structure, and functioning of the Indian Constitution. This course examines the 
historical evolution, key features, and various interpretations of the Constitution, highlighting 
its significance in shaping India's legal and political landscape. Through this course, students 
will gain insights into the roles and responsibilities of different branches of government, 
fundamental rights and duties of citizens, and the constitutional mechanisms that ensure the 
democratic functioning of the nation. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1 To realize the significance of constitution of India to students from all walks of life and 
help them to understand the basic concepts of Indian constitution. 
2 To identify the importance of fundamental rights as well as fundamental duties. 
3 To understand the functioning of Union, State and Local Governments in Indian federal 
system. 
4 To learn procedure and effects of emergency, composition and activities of election 
commission and amendment procedure. 
5 To acquire knowledge to appear for competitive examinations. 
 
UNIT-I                                            9 Hrs 
Historical Background – Constituent Assembly of India – Philosophical Foundations of The 
Indian Constitution – Preamble – Constitutional amendments 
 
UNIT-II                                                     9 Hrs
  
Fundamental Rights – Directive Principles of State Policy – Fundamental Duties – Citizenship – 
Constitutional Remedies for Citizens;  
 
UNIT-III                                 9 Hrs 
Union Government – Structures of the Union Government and Functions – President – Vice 
President – Prime Minister – Cabinet – Parliament – Supreme Court of India – Judicial Review. 
 
UNIT-IV                                 9 Hrs 
State Government – Structure and Functions – Governor – Chief Minister – Cabinet – State 
Legislature – Judicial System in States – High Courts and other Subordinate Courts. 
 
UNIT-V                                            9 Hrs 
Statutory Institutions -Elections-Election Commission of India, National Human Rights 
Commission, National Commission for Women; Local Self Government; Lok pal. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course the student should be able to: 
1. Understand and explain the significance of Indian Constitution as the fundamental law of the land. 
2. Exercise his fundamental rights in proper sense at the same time identifies his responsibilities in 
national building. 
3. Analyze the Indian political system, the powers and functions of the Union, State and Local 
Governments in detail 
4. Understand Electoral Process, Emergency provisions and Amendment procedure. 
5. Take part in competitive examinations with confidence. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Durga Das Basu, “Introduction to the Constitution of India “, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi. 
2. R.C.Agarwal, (1997) “Indian Political System”, S.Chand and Company, New Delhi. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Sharma, Brij Kishore, “Introduction to the Constitution of India”, Prentice Hall of India, New 
Delhi. 
2. The Constitution of India (2022) : 
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s380537a945c7aaa788ccfcdf1b99b5d8f/uploads/2023/05/20230501
95.pdf  
3. Refer the website through the link given for Constitution of India in various Indian Languages 
https://legislative.gov.in/constitution-of-india/  
4. Indian Constitution at Work by National Council of Educational Research and Training, Sri 
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201D                                   ETHICAL HACKING                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                                           3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course is about to learn ethical hacking and security challenges in computer networking. 
Which addresses the data security issues and types of attacks includes malwares, viruses, sniffer 
and denial of service. It teaches ethical responsibilities, professional integrity and making 
appropriate use of the tools and techniques. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. Know the concepts of hacking, ports and penetration testing 
2. Understand the foot printing types and techniques of scanning 
3. Understand the process of system hacking, trojans and backdoors 
4. Apply the concepts of sniffing, packet analysis & session Hijacking 
5. Learn the ethical issues and responsibilities associated with ethical hacking 
 
UNIT-I            9 Hrs 
Introduction to Hacking: Hacking, Types and phases of hacking. Introduction to Ports & 
Protocols: Ports, Protocols, Primary Network Types. Introduction to Penetration Testing: 
Penetration test, Categories and Types of Penetration tests, Structure of Penetration Test Report. 
 
UNIT-II           9 Hrs 
Footprinting: Footprinting, Types, Using ping and ns Lookup commands in Windows 
command line. Scanning: Scanning, Basics of Scanning, Basic Techniques of Scanning, 
Enumerating DNS using dns enum, Performing flag scan using hping3. 
UNIT-III                         10 Hrs 
Issues Hacking into System: System Hacking, Password Cracking, Default password 
databases, Manual and Automated Password Cracking, Process of System Hacking, Using 
Keyloggers. Trojans & Backdoors: Trojans, Working of Trojan, Infection Techniques, Attack, 
Lifecycle and Classification of Virus, Worms, Virus Construction Kit. 
UNIT-IV           9 Hrs 
Types, Sniffing, Packet Analysis & Session Hijacking: Sniffing, Packet Analysis, Types of 
Sniffing, Active and Passive Sniffing Techniques, Session Hijacking. Cryptography: 
Cryptography, Digital Signature, Hash Functions. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                         8 Hrs 
An introduction to the particular legal, professional and ethical issues likely to face the domain 
of ethical hacking. Ethical responsibilities, professional integrity and making appropriate use of 
the tools and techniques associated with ethical hacking. 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to 
1. Explain the concepts related to hacking, ports and protocols, penetration testing 
2. Determine the applicable footprinting techniques and scanning methods 
3. Explain the process of system hacking and explain the concepts Trojans, backdoors, worms and 
virus and it’s countermeasures 
4. Demonstrate systematic understanding of the concepts of sniffing and cryptography 
5. Understand the legal and professional responsibilities of ethical hacking 
 
Text Books: 
1. Jiawei Hacking: Be a Hacker with Ethics, Harsh Bothra, Khanna Publications, 2019. 
2. Ethical Hacking and Penetration Testing Guide, Rafay Baloch, 2014. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Alex Berson Kali Linux Wireless Penetration Testing Beginner's Guide, Vivek 
Ramachandran, Cameron Buchanan, Packt Publishing, 2015. 
2. SQL Injection Attacks and Defense, 1st Edition, Justin Clarke-Salt, Syngress Publication. 
3. Mastering Modern Web Penetration Testing, Prakhar Prasad, Packt Publishing, October 
2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201E                       FUNDAMENTALS OF COMPUTERS                    L T P C 
                                                                                                                                           3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to aim at imparting a basic level appreciation program. The incumbent 
can use the computer for basic purposes of preparing his personnel/business letters, viewing 
information on the Internet (the web), sending mail, using internet banking services, etc. and 
allows to become digitally literate. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To introduce the fundamental concepts of computers, including their characteristics, 
types, and applications. 
2. To explain the functional components of a computer and various input/output devices. 
3. To understand different types of computer memory and storage devices. 
4. To introduce computer languages and software, including algorithms and programming 
languages and provide an overview of operating systems and basic networking concepts. 
5. To introduce the components and practical applications of MS Office. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Introduction to Computer: Computer Characteristics, Concept of Hardware, Software, 
Evolution of computer and Generations, Types of Computers–Analog and Digital computers, 
Hybrid Computers, General Purpose and Special Purpose Computers, Limitations of 
Applications of Computer in Various Fields. 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs                                                                            
Structure and Working of Computer: Functional Block Diagram of Computer. CPU, ALU, 
Memory UNIT-, Bus Structure of Digital Computer–Address, Data and Control Bus. 
Input/Output Devices: Input Device– Keyboard, Mouse, Scanner, MICR,OMR. Output 
Devices–VDU, Printers– Dot Matrix, Daisy-wheel, Inkjet, Laser, Line Printers and Plotters. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Computer Memory: Memory Concept, Memory Cell, Memory Organization, Semiconductor 
Memory – RAM, ROM, PROM, EPROM, Secondary Storage Devices – Magnetic Tape, 
Magnetic Disk (Floppy Disk and Hard Disk.), Compact Disk. 
Computer Language and Software: Algorithm, Flowcharts, Machine Language, Assembly 
Language, High Level Language, Assembler, Compiler, Interpreter. Characteristics of Good 
Language. Software – System and Application Software. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Operating System: Operating System, Evolution of Operating System. Functions of Operating 
System. Types of Operating Systems. Detailed Study of Windows Operating System. 
Introduction and Features of LINUXOS. 
Networking: Concept, Basic Elements of a Communication System, Data Transmission 
Media,Topologies, LAN, MAN, WAN, Internet 
 
 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
MSOffice: Introduction to MS Office, Components and Features. MSWord: Creating Letter, 
Table, Fonts, Page Layout Document, Formatting, Spell Check, Print Preview, Template, Color, 
Mail Merge, AutoText, Inserting Picture, WordArt. 
MS Excel: Introduction to Excel, Sorting, Queries, Graphs, Scientific Functions. 
PowerPoint: Introduction to PowerPoint, Creation of Slides, Inserting Pictures, Preparing Slide 
Show with Animation. MS Access: Creation and Manipulation of Files. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, student will be able to:  
1. Understand the basic characteristics, types, and applications of computers. 
2. Comprehend the functional components and input/output devices of a computer. 
3. Describe various memory types and secondary storage devices. 
4. Differentiate between machine, assembly, and high-level languages and their associated 
tools. Understand the role and types of operating systems, with knowledge of Windows 
and Linux, and basic networking concepts. 
5. Utilize MS Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Access for practical applications. 
Text Books: 
1. Peter Norton: Computing Fundamentals.6th Edition, Mc Graw Hill-Osborne, 2007. 
2. Sarita Dhawale, Thakur Akash Ashok: Fundamentals of Computer, Thakur Publication 
Pvt. Ltd. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Deborah Morley and Charles S.Parker; Fundamentals of Computers; Cengage Learning, 
India edition; 2009. 
2. Alex is Leon and Mathews Leon; Fundamentals of Information Technology; Vikas 
Publication, Chennai. 
3. Francis Scheid; Theory and Problems of Introduction to Computer Science Schaum’s 
Outline Series; Tata Mc Graw Hill publication. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201F                        GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT                  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is important for professionals from the point of creating engendered perspectives 
and sensitivity toward issues concerning women, men, and sexual minorities. It further 
reaffirms the belief in the importance of grassroots experiences and narratives while dealing 
with gender issues. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand key concepts, and issues in gender and development  
2. Understand the social construction of gender and develop gender perspectives in 
analyzing social realities 
3. Understand how the gender dynamics of power and inequality play out in the social 
institutions of households, markets, and states and within the arena of civil society.  
4. Create awareness about the magnitude of gender disparities in the present context  
5. Examine through the gender lens, the interlinkage between cultural practices social 
processes, and development approaches  
 
UNIT-I Basic Concepts and Theories of Feminism                                                         10 Hrs 
Concepts- gender, gender studies, gender identity, gender role stereotyping, gender division of 
labor, gender discrimination, gender equality, and equity.  Overview of feminist theories – 
Liberal feminism, Radical Feminism, Black feminism, postmodern feminism, Eco‐ feminism; 
The international background to the Women’s Movement, The genesis of the Women’s 
Movement in India. Contemporary Contestations – Intersex and Transgender Movements. • 
Feminist thinkers in the 18th, 19th, 20th, and 21st Centuries.  
 
UNIT-II Gender Issues                                                                                                       10 Hrs 
Major gender issues – national and global - causes and consequences., LGBTQIA+ issues 
(Gender violence in private and public spaces: Domestic violence, Dowry, trafficking in women 
and children, rape, sex-selective abortion, female infanticide, female foeticide, child marriage, 
prostitution • Gender, leadership, and workplace; Sexual Harassment at Workplace). Gender
based violence, patriarchy, sexism, racism, casteism, economic inequality, and misogyny. 
Gender and health (Physical and mental), reproductive health, and sexuality. Feminization of 
poverty. Issues of the rights of sexual minorities and transgender - Article 377 and beyond. 
 
UNIT-III Gender Perspectives in Development                                                               10 Hrs 
Gender Analysis Tools: Gender budgeting, Gender mainstreaming, SIG, Gender Parity Index, 
Gender Inequality Index, Human Development Index, Gender Development Index, Gender 
Empowerment Measure, Approaches to development-- Women in Development (WID), 
Women and Development (WAD), Gender and Development(GAD), Millennium Development 
Goals, and Sustainable Development Gender Analysis Frameworks; Gender blind; neutral and 
redistributive policies; Welfare, Efficiency and Empowerment approaches to Gender; Strategic 
and practical gender needs/interests; Case Studies to understand the engagement with gender, 
(Poverty alleviation Forestry; Drinking Water and Sanitation; Health programmes, Urban 
renewal and slum rehabilitation Programmes, and micro-credit programmes like SHGs. 
 
  
UNIT-IV Mechanisms Addressing Issues and Best Practices                                        10 Hrs 
Constitutional and legislative safeguards, policies, and programmes • Institutional mechanisms: 
National Commission for Women, Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, Crime Against Women Cell, Family 
Court, Family Counselling Centers and Crisis intervention centers • Best practices to address 
disparity, violence, and safety issues 
International initiatives world conferences, women’s decade, CEDAW. Indian initiatives – 
Towards Equality Report, National Perspective Plan for women, National Policy for the 
Empowerment of Women-2001, National and State women’s Commissions, Nirbhaya, Women 
Development Corporation; Legal remedies and Social Welfare Services available to Women 
Facing Violence. 
 
UNIT-V Gender and Media                                                                                                5 Hrs 
Discourse on Women and Media Studies- Mainstream Media, Feminist Media. • Coverage of 
Women’s issues, sexual minorities, and issues of women in Mass Media and Media 
Organizations (Audio-Visual and Print media). • Digital Media and legal protection 
(cybercrimes and laws). • Alternative Media – Folk Art, Street Play and Theatre. • Indecent 
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, Pornography, Impact of media on Gender. 
Construction of masculinity and feminity in media.   
 
Course Outcomes:  
By the end of the course, students should be able to:  
1. Understand the concept of gender and the social construction of feminity and masculinity  
2. Develop sensitivity towards the existing practices leading to gender discrimination and 
marginalization in society.  
3. Develop the ability to identify social, economic and political systems that adversely affect the 
well-being and functioning of women. 
4. Suggest affirmative action in planning to promote gender equity, equality, and safety for women 
and sexual minorities  
5. Understand the major theoretical and empirical issues that emerge in the gender field. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Nalini Visvanathan (Ed.), (2006) The Women, Gender and Development Reader, 
Zubaan, New  Delhi 
2. Kannabiran, Kalpana& Ritu Menon. 2007. From Mathura to Manorma: Resisting 
Violence Against Women, New Delhi: Women Unlimited 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Seth, M. 2001. Women and Development: The Indian Experience. New Delhi: Sage 
Publications. 
2. Banerjee, N; S. Sen &N. Dhawan. 2011. Mapping the Field: Gender Relations in 
Contemporary India, Volume 1, Kolkata: Stree  
3. Bose, C.E. &Minjeong Kim. 2009. Global Gender Research: Transnational Perspectives, 
New York: Routledge 
Notes 
 
1. https://www.studocu.com/row/document/kohat-university-of-science-and
technology/gender-studies/gender-studies-new-lecture-notes-1-7/5176872 
2. https://teentalk.ca/learn-about/gender
identity/#:~:text=There%20are%20many%20different%20gender,or%20a%20combinati
on%20of%20these. 
3. https://genderspectrum.org/articles/understanding-gender 
 
 
TAUT1201G                          LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive introduction to the fundamental concepts of leadership. 
Students will gain knowledge of different leadership levels and styles, and understand the 
significance of vision and strategy formulation. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the basic concepts of leadership 
2. Knowledge of leadership development strategy 
3. Knowledge of leadership development approaches 
4. Knowledge of leadership traits 
5. Awareness on self-awareness exercises.  
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs                                                         
Understanding Leadership-Defining Leadership; Leadership styles, Entrepreneurial leaders, 
Different levels of leaders 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Strategy formulation- formulation of vision, Strategy formulation and communication, role of 
the leader in managing change, foundation for effective team development 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Leadership development approaches- Significance of leadership development strategy, 
leadership development approaches- One-to-one coaching, Mentor schemes, Role of HR and 
development, Buddy pairs, Action learning sets, Work-based projects  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Recognizing Leadership Traits-Historical Leaders; Traits Leaders Display, Leadership 
Studies: What Traits Do Effective Leaders Exhibit. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Recognizing self - Exercises of Self-awareness using Johari Window, Development diaries, 
Feedback exercises, Personal vision setting 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of leadership 
2. Understand the significance of vision and strategy formulation 
3. Knowledge of leadership development approaches.  
4. Knowledge of leadership traits. 
5. Knowledge of self-awareness techniques 
Text Books:  
1. Rosemary Ryan, Leadership Development - A guide for HR and Training professionals, 
ELSEVIER, UK  
2. Kim S. Cameron, Positive Leadership: Strategies for Extraordinary Performance, 
Reference Books: 
1. Manuel London, Leadership Development: Paths To Self-insight and Professional 
Growth, Psychology Press, New York. 
2. Susan E. Murphy, Ronald E. Riggio, The Future of Leadership Development, Routledge 
is an imprint of Taylor & Franci 
 
TAUT1201H                              MATHEMATICAL THINKING                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
Mathematical Thinking is a university elective course that teaches fundamental concepts of 
basic algebraic and mathematical operations. After learning this course, students will easily be 
able to learn more problems solving skills and use this course for practicing. The course 
emphasizes problem-solving skills and analytical thinking, and equips students with the skills 
necessary to tackle real-world problems using basic mathematical and arithmetical concepts. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, the students will be able: 
1. To familiarize the students with the fundamental concepts of basic numbers, mathematical 
operations, and divisibility rules 
2. Summarize the basic concepts mathematical operations on numbers and calculate LCM, 
GCD to solve simple problems. 
3. Compute To probability concepts and statistical methods in various applications 
engineering. 
4. Understand the formula for evaluate the square root and cube root of different types 
numbers  
5. Impart the arrangements and selections of things and counting numbers and check for 
independence of events. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Number system and Tests of Divisibility: Digits, numbers, Indian-Hindu-Arabic system, 
Roman Numbers, Face Value and Place values, Various Types of Numbers or Standard 
Numbers, Prime number, composite numbers, Perfect Numbers, Co-primes (or) Relative 
Primes, Twin primes, perfect numbers, Testing of prime numbers, Mathematical operations on 
even and odd numbers. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
LCM and GCD or HCF: Factors and Multiplers, Highest Common Factor (H.C.F.) or Greatest 
Common Measure (G.C.M.) or Greatest Common Divisor (G.C.D.) factorization method, 
division method, finding the H.C.F. of more than two numbers, factorization method of finding 
L.C.M, H.C.F. and L.C.M. of fractions. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
System Simplifications: BODMAS’ Rule, Modulus of a Real Number, Virnaculum (or Bar), 
Algebraic identities, set theory operations (union, intersection, complements). 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs   
Square Roots, Cube Roots, averages and percentages: Square Root, cube root, Problems on 
numbers, concept of averages, problems on averages, concept of percentage and problems on 
percentages. 
 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Permutations, combinations and Probability:  Fundamental principle with respect of addition 
and multiplication, permutations, combination, relation between permutation and combination, 
Random experiment, sample space and basic problems of events of a probability. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to: 
1. To explain fundamental concepts of basic number system, including standard numbers, 
mathematical operations, and divisibility rules. 
2. To apply mathematical operations on numbers and calculate lcm, gcd to solve simple 
problems. 
3. To evaluate the arrangements and selections of things and counting numbers. 
4. To understand the simplications by using identities and apply the different kinds of 
operations on the numbers. 
5. To evaluate square root and cube root of different types numbers and calculate 
appropriate solutions for different problems. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Quantitative Aptitude  Text Book, Dr.RS.Agrrwal. 
2. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book,S.Chandu. 
3. Andhra Pradesh Academy of IPE text books. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book, Quicker Mathematics ,second edition 
2. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book,Abjuirh guwaha,Fourth edition 
3. www.online quantitative aptitude testseries.com 
4. Quantitative Aptitude, GSR Publications,Gunturu,third edition 
5. Quantitative Aptitude, verbal reasoning ,Guptha publication,3rd edition 
6. www.enaduprathibaonline.com  and www.sakshionlineseries.com 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201I                                                 NURSING            L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This module is designed to help the students to acquire comprehensive knowledge in basic 
concepts of Health, Nursing, Vital signs, Basic Life support, home care management of 
Diabetes & Hypertension and Adolescent health.  
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand the concept of health, illness, and Nursing 
2. Learn the technique of assessing and monitoring vital signs  
3. Perform BLS using evidence based national or international guidelines in the management of 
adult victims with the cardiac arrest. 
4. Understand the concept of home care management of Diabetes and Hypertensive persons  
5. Develop understanding about the normal growth and development, needs and health issues of 
adolescents  
 
UNIT-I              03 Hrs 
Concepts of Health and Nursing: Definition of Health and ill ness, Health-illness continuum, 
Factors influencing Health, Nursing as a profession and Career ladder. 
UNIT-II          12 Hrs 
Vital signs: Temperature: Physiology, regulation, factors affecting body temperature, 
Assessment of body temperature: sites, technique and special considerations.  
Pulse: Physiology & regulation, characteristics of the pulse, factors affecting pulse, Assessment 
of the pulse: sites, location, technique and special considerations.  
Respiration: Physiology and regulation, mechanics of breathing, characteristics of the 
respiration, factors affecting respiration, Assessment of respiration: technique and special 
considerations.  
Blood pressure: Physiology and regulation, characteristics of the blood pressure, factors 
affecting blood pressure. Assessment of blood pressure: sites, equipment and technique and 
special considerations. Recording of vital signs. 
Pain: Definition, types physiology of pain and factors influencing the pain 
 
UNIT-III           8 Hrs 
Basic life support / basic cardiopulmonary life support (BLS/BCLS) 
Introduction, definition, purposes, indications, contraindications and steps in procedure. 
UNIT-IV          12 Hrs 
Home care management of Diabetes and Hypertension  
Diabetes- Introduction to Diabetes Mellitus –   A National and Global burden: Classification, 
risk factors, pathophysiology, manifestations, screening, diagnostic criteria and complications, 
The treatment Modalities of Diabetes Mellitus: (Life style modifications 
Diet therapy, Exercise, Medical Management, Self-Management, Practical Aspects: Blood 
Glucose monitoring, Diabetic foot care, Exercises, Diabetic Diet Planning, Self-Insulin 
administration) 
Hypertension- Introduction to Hypertension, Types, risk factors , pathophysiology 
,manifestations, diagnostic criteria and complications, treatment modalities  : life style 
modifications, Diet therapy ,Exercise ,Medical management.  
 
UNIT-V          10 Hrs 
Adolescent Health: Growth and Development of adolescent, Nutritional and developmental 
needs of adolescent, Common health problems including mental health problems, Reproductive 
and sexual health issues 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Acquire a thorough knowledge on concept of health and illness. 
2. Demonstrate skills in monitoring the vital signs 
3. Develop skills in performing BLS/BCLS 
4. Able to attain knowledge and skills on treatment modalities of DM 
5. Aware of normal Growth and development and common health problems in adolescent  
 
Text Books: 
1. Potter and perrys, Fundamentals of Nursing,4th edition, Mosby, Elsevier publication  
2. Lewis, textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing 4th south  Asian edition, Elsevier publication 
3. Dorothy R. Marlow, Text book of paediatric nursing, sixth edition, Elsevier publications, 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Joyce M black textbook of medical surgical nursing ,8th edition, Elsevier publications, 
2. Kozier and Erbs, textbook of fundamentals of Nursing, Elsevier publications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201J                                       ONE HEALTH              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                           3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This course introduces students to the One Health approach, an interdisciplinary approach that 
recognizes the interconnectedness of human, animal and environmental health. Students will 
learn about the history of One Health, its relevance to global health and its role in addressing a 
range of health challenges, including zoonotic diseases, environmental health hazards and 
antimicrobial resistance. The course will also explore current and emerging One Health 
challenges and innovations and the ethical considerations of One Health research and practice. 
Course Objectives:  
1. To explain the relevance of One Health to global health. 
2. To understand the interdisciplinary nature of One Health research and practice. 
3. To analyze the impact of environmental health hazards on human and animal health. 
4. To identify emerging One Health challenges and innovations. 
5. To evaluate ethical considerations in One Health research and practice. 
 
UNIT-I                                    9 Hrs 
Overview of One Health and its relevance to global health, Definition of One Health and its 
history, Examples of One Health challenges, such as zoonotic diseases and antimicrobial 
resistance, The role of inter-disciplinarity in One Health research and practice, Global One 
Health initiatives and their impact 
 
UNIT-II                                                 9 Hrs 
Environmental health and its relationship to One Health, Overview of environmental health and 
its impact on human and animal health, Environmental risks to health, such as pollution and 
climate change, Case studies highlighting the impact of environmental hazards on human and 
animal health, The role of One Health in addressing environmental health challenges 
 
UNIT-III                      9 Hrs 
Zoonotic diseases and One Health, Overview of zoonotic diseases and their impact on human 
and animal health, The ecology of zoonotic diseases and how they emerge and spread, Case 
studies of major zoonotic disease outbreaks, such as Ebola and COVID-19, The One Health 
approach to preventing and controlling zoonotic diseases. 
 
UNIT-IV                      9 Hrs 
Antimicrobial resistance and One Health, Overview of antimicrobial resistance and its impact 
on human and animal health, the relationship between antimicrobial use in animal agriculture 
and human health, the role of One Health in addressing the global challenge of antimicrobial 
resistance, Case studies of One Health approaches to controlling antimicrobial resistance, such 
as the WHO Global Action Plan 
  
UNIT-V                      9 Hrs 
Future directions in One Health research and practice, Emerging One Health challenges-food 
security and emerging infectious diseases, Innovations in One Health research and practice, 
such as digital technologies and genomics, Opportunities for One Health collaboration across 
sectors and disciplines, Ethical considerations in One Health research and practice.  
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Describe the One Health approach and its relevance to global health 
2. Analyze the impact of environmental health hazards on human and animal health 
3. Evaluate the role of One Health in addressing zoonotic diseases and controlling antimicrobial 
resistance 
4. Identify emerging One Health challenges and innovations 
5. Discuss ethical considerations in One Health research and practice 
Text Books: 
1. One Health: People, Animals and the Environment by Ronald M. Atlas and Stanley Maloy 
2. One Health: The Human-Animal-Environment Interfaces in Emerging Infectious Diseases by 
John S. Mackenzie and Martyn Jeggo 
 
Reference Books: 
1. One Health: The Theory and Practice of Integrated Health Approaches edited by Jakob Zinsstag, 
Esther Schelling, David Waltner-Toews and Maxine Whittaker 
2. One Health and the Politics of Antimicrobial Resistance edited by Laura H. Kahn, Bruce Kaplan 
and Thomas P. Monath 
3. The One Health Initiative: A Global Movement to Achieve Sustainable Health and Well-being 
edited by Bruce Kaplan and Thomas P. Monath. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201K    BASIC EMERGENCY CARE AND LIFE SUPPORT SKILLS       L T P C 
                                                                                                                                             3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This course introduces students to the fundamental skills required for providing basic 
emergency care and life support. It covers essential techniques in CPR, AED use, and basic first 
aid to prepare students for real-life emergency situations. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. To understand the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. To acquire essential first aid skills. 
3. To know the use of AED 
4. To get trained in the practical aspects of CPR. 
5. To know the various assessment aspects of a patient in an emergency 
 
UNIT-I Basic Life Support (BLS) and CPR   9 Hrs 
Introduction to BLS and CPR, Steps of Adult, Child, and Infant CPR, Airway Management, 
Rescue Breathing and Chest Compressions 
 
UNIT-II Automated External Defibrillator (AED)   9 Hrs 
What is an AED? When and How to Use an AED, Safety Precautions, Different types of 
Defibrillators 
 
UNIT-III Basic First Aid Techniques    9 Hrs 
Principles of First Aid, Managing Bleeding and Wounds, Fractures and Sprains, Burns and 
Scalds. 
  
UNIT-IV Recognizing Medical Emergencies    9 Hrs 
Identifying Common Medical Emergencies, Initial Assessment and Response, Managing 
Breathing and Cardiac Emergencies. 
 
UNIT-V Practical Skills Practice    9 Hrs 
Hands-on CPR Practice, AED Operation Drills, First Aid Skills Practice, Scenario-Based 
Training 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Acquire a thorough knowledge of the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. Apply essential first aid skills. 
3. Demonstrate the use of AED in Emergencies. 
4. Demonstrate the practical aspects of CPR  
5. Evaluate various assessment plans by the specific emergency. 
Text Books: 
1. "Basic Life Support Provider Manual" by American Heart Association Pang, Ning Tan, Michael 
Steinbach and Vipin Kumar “Introduction to Data Mining”,  Pearson Education, 2007. 
2. "First Aid Manual" by St. John Ambulance 
 
 
TAUT1201L                       BASICS OF HEALTH MANAGEMENT                       L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides an essential foundation in health management, focusing on key areas such 
as basic life support, first aid, stroke management, and the prevention and management of both 
communicable and non-communicable diseases. Students will develop practical skills and 
knowledge to effectively manage health-related situations in various settings. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. To understand the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. To acquire essential first aid skills. 
3. To comprehend the causes, symptoms, and management of stroke. 
4. To learn about non-communicable diseases, their risk factors, and management strategies. 
5. To understand communicable diseases, their transmission, prevention, and control. 
 
UNIT-I Basic Life Support                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Overview of Basic Life Support (BLS), Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) Techniques, Use 
of Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs), Airway Management and Breathing Support, 
BLS Protocols and Procedures 
 
UNIT-II First Aid                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Introduction to First Aid Principles, Managing Wounds and Bleeding, Fractures and 
Musculoskeletal Injuries, Burns and Scalds Treatment, Handling Medical Emergencies (e.g., 
heart attack, choking, seizures) 
 
UNIT-III Stroke                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Understanding Stroke: Types and Causes, Symptoms and Warning Signs of Stroke, Immediate 
Response and Management, Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery, Prevention and Risk 
Reduction Strategies 
  
UNIT-IV Non-Communicable Diseases                                                                           9 Hrs 
Definition and Classification of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs), Common NCDs: 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Diabetes, Cancer, Chronic Respiratory Diseases, Risk Factors and 
Prevention Strategies, Management and Treatment Approaches, Public Health Implications and 
Policy Responses 
 
UNIT-V Communicable Diseases                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Introduction to Communicable Diseases, Modes of Transmission and Epidemiology, Prevention 
and Control Measures (e.g., vaccination, hygiene, quarantine), Management of Common 
Communicable Diseases (e.g., TB, HIV/AIDS, Influenza), Emerging Infectious Diseases and 
Global Health Security 
  
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Perform basic life support techniques. 
2. Administer essential first aid. 
3. Recognize and manage stroke symptoms and treatments. 
4. Understand and address non-communicable diseases. 
5. Implement communicable disease control measures. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Basic Life Support Provider Manual" by American Heart Association 
2.  "First Aid Manual" by St. John Ambulance, St. Andrew's First Aid, and the British Red 
Cross 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Stroke: Practical Guide to Management" by Charles P. Warlow 
2.  "Non-Communicable Diseases in the Developing World" by Rachel Nugent 
3.  "Communicable Disease Control and Health Protection Handbook" by Jeremy Hawker 
et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201N                                ENTREPRENEURSHIP                                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of entrepreneurship, its applications, and its 
scope. Students will learn to generate broad ideas for starting an enterprise or startup and 
convert them into viable opportunities. The course covers the essentials of managing startups, 
understanding small and medium enterprises, and gaining knowledge of various financial 
institutions. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the concept of Entrepreneurship, its applications and scope. 
2. Application of knowledge for generating a broad idea for a starting an enterprise/start up 
and converting to opportunity. 
3. Knowledge of managing the start-up's 
4. Understand the small and medium enterprises 
5. Knowledge of different financial institutions 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship: Definition and Concept of entrepreneurship - Entrepreneur Characteristics – Classification of Entrepreneurs –Role of Entrepreneurship in Economic Development 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Idea to Opportunity- Introduction, Sources of New Ideas, Techniques for Generating Ideas, 
Assessing Business Potential of an Idea, Opportunity Recognition, Sources and process, Indian 
Economy—Opportunities, Steps Involved in Tapping Opportunity 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship Development - Intrapreneurship, Entrepreneurship as a Career Option, 
Female Entrepreneurship and problems, Types of Start-ups, Start-ups and mistakes, Managing 
Start-ups During Downturn 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship Trends- Small and Medium Business Enterprises, International 
Entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurship—Emerging Trends in the Global Knowledge Economy 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Institutions Supporting and Taxation Benefits: Central level Institutions: NABARD; 
SIDBI,– State Level Institutions –DICs – SFC - Government Policy for MSMEs - Tax 
Incentives and Concessions. 
 
  
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic understanding of entrepreneurship  
2. Knowledge of idea generation and opportunities identification of entrepreneurship  
3. Understand different forms of enterprises 
4. Understand different emerging trends of entrepreneurship 
5. Knowledge of different financial institutions 
Text Books: 
1. Arya Kumar, Entrepreneurship, Pearson, Delhi  
2. Poornima MCH, Entrepreneurship Development –Small Business Enterprises, Pearson, Delhi  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Anil Kumar, S., ET.al., Entrepreneurship Development, New Age International Publishers, New 
Delhi 
2. Khanka, SS, Entrepreneurship Development, S. Chand, New Delhi  
3. Peter F. Drucker,Innovation and Entrepreneurship  
4. A.Sahay, M. S. Chhikara, New Vistas of Entrepreneurship: Challenges &Opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201O                            MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS                                   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides a solid foundation in the fundamentals of economics and managerial 
economics. Students will learn to apply concepts of production cost and revenues for effective 
business decisions. The course also covers analyzing capital investments to maximize returns, 
understanding different forms of business organizations, and evaluating business organizations 
and marketing strategies. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the fundamentals of Economics and Managerial economics 
2. Apply the Concept of Production cost and revenues for effective Business decision 
3. Analyze how to invest their capital and maximize returns. 
4. Understand different forms of business organizations 
5. Evaluate Business organizations and marketing strategies 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Introduction: Meaning, Nature, Significance, Functions, and Advantages, ME and its role in 
other fields. Demand - Concept, Function, Law of Demand - Demand Elasticity- Types – 
Measurement. Demand Forecasting- Factors governing forecasting and methods.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Production: Introduction – Nature, meaning, significance, functions and advantages. 
Production Function– Least- cost combination– Short run and Long run Production Function- 
Isoquants and Isocosts, MRTS - Cobb-Douglas Production Function - Laws of Returns 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Cost & Break-Even Analysis - Cost concepts and Cost behavior- Break-Even Analysis (BEA) - Determination of Break-Even Point (Simple Problems)-Managerial significance and 
limitations of Break-Even Analysis. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Business Organizations Introduction – Nature, meaning, significance, functions and 
advantages. Forms of Business Organizations- Sole Proprietary - Partnership - Joint Stock 
Companies - Public Sector Enterprises. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Markets Types of Markets - Perfect and Imperfect Competition - Features of Perfect 
Competition Monopoly- Monopolistic Competition–Oligopoly-Price-Output Determination - 
Pricing Methods and Strategies. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic understanding of managerial economics  
2. Develop an understanding of the applications of production 
3. Interpret cost analysis 
4. Understand different forms of business organizations. 
5. Analyse the causes and consequences of different market conditions. 
 
 
 
 
Text Books:  
1. Varshney & Maheswari: Managerial Economics, Sultan Chand, 2013. 
2. Aryasri: Business Economics and Financial Analysis, 4/e, MGH, 2019. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Ahuja Hl Managerial economics Schand,3/e,2013 
2. S.A. Siddiqui and A.S. Siddiqui: Managerial Economics and Financial Analysis, New 
Age International, 2013. 
3. Joseph G. Nellis and David Parker: Principles of Business Economics, Pearson, 2/e, 
New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201P                                 ORGANIC FARMING                                             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
By the end of the course, students will be equipped with the knowledge and skills to plan, 
establish, and manage organic farms effectively. This course serves as a foundation for aspiring 
organic farmers, agricultural professionals, and individuals interested in sustainable food 
production and environmental conservation. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To Understand the principles and practices of organic farming. 
2. To Analyze the environmental, economic, and social implications of conventional versus 
organic agricultural systems. 
3. To Apply organic farming techniques to enhance soil health and fertility. 
4. To Examine the certification processes and regulations governing organic farming. 
5. To explore ways to engage with local communities and promote organic practices. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Introduction to Organic Farming, Overview of organic farming principles and practices, 
Historical development and evolution of organic agriculture, Importance of organic farming in 
sustainable agriculture, Comparison between conventional and organic farming systems, 
Certification and regulatory requirements for organic farming. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Soil Health and Management, Importance of soil health in organic farming, Soil composition 
and structure, Soil fertility management without synthetic inputs, Soil conservation techniques: 
cover cropping, crop rotation, mulching, Composting and vermicomposting for organic matter 
enrichment. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Crop Management in Organic Systems, Selection of suitable crops for organic farming, Organic 
seed selection, saving, and sourcing, Crop planning and rotation strategies, Weed management 
without herbicides: mechanical, cultural, and biological control methods, Pest and disease 
management in organic systems: integrated pest management (IPM), biological control, and 
natural remedies. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Organic Livestock Management, Principles of organic livestock production, Organic feed 
sourcing and formulation, Housing and space requirements for organic livestock, Health care 
and disease management without antibiotics and synthetic chemicals, Organic certification 
requirements for livestock operations. 
  
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Marketing and Economics of Organic Farming, Market trends and consumer demand for 
organic products, Certification and labeling requirements for organic products, Marketing 
strategies for organic farmers: direct sales, farmers markets, CSA (Community Supported 
Agriculture), Economic viability and profitability of organic farming, Government support 
programs and incentives for organic farmers. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course the student shall be able to, 
1. Demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of the principles of organic farming and their 
application in agricultural systems. 
2. Critically evaluate the sustainability of different agricultural practices, considering 
environmental impact, economic viability, and social equity. 
3. Design and implement an organic farming plan for a specific crop or agricultural enterprise. 
4. Analyze case studies and research articles to assess the effectiveness of organic farming 
practices in various contexts. 
5. Communicate effectively about organic farming principles and practices, both orally and in 
writing. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Teaming with Microbes: The Organic Gardener's Guide to the Soil Food Web" by Jeff 
Lowenfels and Wayne Lewis  
2. "The Organic Farmer's Business Handbook: A Complete Guide to Managing Finances, Crops, 
and Staff - and Making a Profit" by Richard Wiswall  
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Introduction to Permaculture" by Bill Mollison  
2. "Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual" by Charles L. Mohler and Sue Ellen 
Johnson  
3. "The Organic Farming Manual: A Comprehensive Guide to Starting and Running a Certified 
Organic Farm" by Anne Larkin Hansen  
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201Q      PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT           L T  P C 
                     3  0  0  3 
Course Description:  
Personality Development is a comprehensive course designed to equip undergraduates with the 
essential skills and knowledge required for personal growth and professional success. The 
course focuses on enhancing self-awareness, emotional intelligence, communication, and 
interpersonal skills. Students will learn how to build confidence, manage stress, and develop 
effective time management strategies. Additionally, the course covers critical aspects of 
professional development, including resume writing, interview techniques, and personal 
branding. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To develop self-awareness and emotional intelligence. 
2. To enhance communication and interpersonal skills. 
3. To build confidence and self-esteem. 
4. To foster professional and personal growth. 
5. To prepare students for successful careers and meaningful personal lives. 
 
UNIT-I Introduction to Personality Development                               9 Hrs 
Definition and importance of personality development; Initial self-assessment and goal setting; 
Short-term and long-term goal setting; Understanding oneself: strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, threats (SWOT analysis); Values, beliefs, and attitudes; Personal vision and 
mission statements; Components of emotional intelligence (EQ); Self-regulation and self
motivation; Empathy and social skills. 
 
UNIT-II Communication Skills and Interpersonal Skills                           9 Hrs 
 Communication Skills; Verbal and non-verbal communication; Active listening and feedback; 
Public speaking and presentation skills; Building and maintaining relationships; Conflict 
resolution and negotiation; Teamwork and collaboration; Importance of cultural sensitivity in a 
globalized world; Developing intercultural communication skills 
 
UNIT-III Critical Thinking, Problem Solving and Self-Esteem                         9 Hrs 
Enhancing analytical and critical thinking skills; Creative problem-solving techniques Decision
making process; Confidence and Self-Esteem; Building self-confidence; Overcoming self-doubt 
and negative thinking; Techniques for boosting self-esteem. 
 
UNIT-IV Time Management and Stress Management                           7 Hrs 
Prioritization and productivity techniques; Overcoming procrastination; Identifying sources of 
stress; Techniques for managing and reducing stress; Work-life balance. 
 
UNIT-V Professional Development and Leadership Skills                        11 Hrs 
Resume writing and job interview skills; Professional etiquette and workplace behavior 
Networking skills; Traits of effective leaders; Leadership styles and theories; Developing 
leadership qualities; Personal Branding, Building a personal brand; Online presence and social 
media etiquette; Personal branding strategies; Final self-assessment and reflection on personal 
growth 
 
Course Outcomes:  
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Develop a personal vision and mission statement to guide future actions and decisions. 
2. Exhibit improved verbal and non-verbal communication skills. 
3. Apply strategies to boost self-confidence and maintain high self-esteem. 
4. Implement effective time management techniques to enhance productivity. 
5. Develop and demonstrate leadership qualities in various scenarios. 
 
Text Books:  
1. Student’s Hand Book- Skill Genie-Higher Education Department, Govt. Of Andhra Pradesh 
https://svimstpt.ap.nic.in/edu/skill_genie.pdf. 
2. The only skill that matters- Jonathan.Levi (2019)- Super Human Enterprises, LLC. All rights 
reserved. ISBN:978-1-5445-0435-3 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Online courses and TED Talks on personality development and self-improvement. 
2. "How to Win Friends and Influence People" by Dale Carnegie (1936) Revised- 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1201R                                      SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course explores the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies, and politics. 
Students will learn about the three pillars of social entrepreneurship and the different types of 
partners and their advantages. The course also covers the typical process steps of creating a 
marketing concept and describes the characteristics of the financing structure of social 
enterprises. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies and politics 
2. Explain the three pillars of social entrepreneurship. 
3. Describe different types of partners for social entrepreneurs and their particular 
advantages. 
4. Understand the typical process steps of a marketing conception. 
5. Describe the characteristics of the financing structure of social enterprises. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Introduction - Meaning of social entrepreneurship- concepts and typologies, its disparity with 
social business and CSR, social entrepreneur & personality, social enterprise. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Drivers and scope: Role of Social Entrepreneurship in -Societies, Economies and Politics, The 
Drivers of Social Entrepreneurship, Size and Scope of Social Entrepreneurship, Opportunities 
for Social Entrepreneurs. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                               9 Hrs                                                                                                
Collaboration and Partnerships - Reasons for Crafting Collaborations, Specific Types of 
Collaborations, Different Collaboration Partners, Potential Risks and Challenges, Guidelines to 
Establish a Collaboration. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Elements of a Marketing Conception- Market analysis, Marketing Goals, Competitive 
Strategy, Measures, Controlling; Peculiarities Concerning Marketing for Social Enterprises, 
Marketing Importance for Social Enterprises.  
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Finance- Types of Financing Instruments- Donations, Equity capital, Debt capital, Hybrid 
capital; Financing institutions-value banks, social investment advisors, social stock exchange, 
Venture Philanthropy Funds, Social Investment Funds, Funding Consultancies 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Knowledge of social entrepreneurship differentiation from other related concepts 
2. Understand the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies and politics 
3. Analysis of different types of partners for social entrepreneurs. 
4. Understand the typical process steps of a marketing conception. 
5. Awareness of the peculiarities of financial elements in social enterprises 
 
  
Text Books:  
1. Christine K. Volkmann & Kim Oliver Tokarski. 2012.Social Entrepreneurship and Social 
Business. Springer Gabler 
2. Madhukar Shukla: Social Entrepreneurship in India. Sage publications 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Archana Singh (auth.) The Process of Social Value Creation: A Multiple-Case Study on 
Social Entrepreneurship in India. Springer India.2016. 
2. Ryszard Praszkier; Andrzej Nowak. Social entrepreneurship : theory and practice [1 
ed.]. Cambridge University Press 
3. Alex Nicholls. Social Entrepreneurship: New Models of Sustainable Social Change. 
Oxford University Press, USA 
 
 
  
BTSL1701: ENGINEERING PHYSICS LAB L T   P  C 
      0 0   2   1 
Prerequisite: Nil 
Course Description: 
The aim of this course is to make the students gain practical knowledge to co-relate with the 
theoretical studies and to develop practical applications of engineering materials and use the 
principle in the right way to implement the modern technology. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To teach students, the importance of physics through involvement in experiments. 
2. To have knowledge of the world due to constant interplay between observations and 
hypothesis, experiment and theory in physics. 
3. To gain knowledge in various areas of physics so as to have real time applications in all 
engineering streams. 
4. To determine the wavelength of the laser source and numerical aperture of optical fibre 
5. To analyse the usage of semiconductor devices and its applications 
 
Concepts of Experimental Physics 
1. Error-Analysis and Drawing Graph 
 
Mechanics - waves and Oscillations 
2. Compound Pendulum 
3.    Estimation of the moment of inertia of a Fly wheel. 
4. Estimation of the Young’s modulus of a steel wire using a torsion pendulum. 
5. Melde’s Experiment 
6. Resonance in LCR Circuits 
Optics 
7. Determine the thickness of the wire using wedge shape method 
8. Determination of the radius of curvature of the lens by Newton’s ring method 
9. Determination of wavelength by plane diffraction grating method 
10. Determination of dispersive power of prism. 
11. Determination of wavelength of LASER light using diffraction grating. 
12. To determine the numerical aperture and acceptance angle of a given optical fibre 
Semiconductor Physics 
13. Energy Gap of a semi-conductor. 
14. I-V Characteristics (Resistor, Diode, Solar Cell, LDR) 
  
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completing this course, the student must demonstrate the knowledge and ability 
to: 
1. Develop analytical/experimental skills and impart prerequisite hands-on 
experience for engineering laboratories 
2. Understand the need for precise measurement practices for data recording. 
3. Understand the principle, concept, working and applications of relevant 
technologies and comparison of results with theoretical calculations 
4. Analyse the techniques and skills associated with modern scientific tools such as 
lasers and fibre optics 
5. Develop basic communication skills through working in groups in performing 
the laboratory experiments and by interpreting the results. 
 
  
BTSL1801: PROBLEM SOLVING AND PROGRAMMING WITH C LAB L  T  P  C 
 
0   0   2   1 
 
Course Description: 
This lab course is designed to improve knowledge, logical skills, enhances the analyzing and 
problem-solving skills which can be used for developing programs in C. 
Course Objectives: 
 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1.   Understand the environment and enable to write algorithm and draw the flowchart. 
2.   Create the programs using control statements. 
3.   Analyse and modularize the problem into sub programs. 
4.   Develop programs using the concepts of arrays and strings. 
5. Solve the memory access related problems and can Analyse the file handling 
mechanisms. 
 
 
1. A) Write an algorithm, draw a flowchart for: 
i) Finding the area and circumference of a circle of given radius. 
ii) Finding the volume of a sphere of given radius. 
iii) Finding the interest on a given principle for a given period of time at a given rate of 
interest per year. 
B) Familiarization with programming environment and write a C program for: 
i) Finding the area and circumference of a circle of given radius. 
ii) Finding the volume of a sphere of given radius. 
iii) Finding the interest on a given principle for a given period of time at a given rate of 
interest per year. 
2.  A) Write a C program to calculate the total and percentage of a student for the given marks. 
B) Write a C program to display all the sizes of datatypes in C. 
C) Write a C program to convert an integer into character. 
 
 
3. A) Write a C program to find whether a given number is even or odd. 
B)  A salesman gets a commission of 5% on the sales if his sales are below Rs.5000/- and a 
commission of 8% on the sales that exceeds Rs.5000/- together with Rs.250/-. Write an 
algorithm or a flowchart and develop C program for computing the commission of the 
salesman, based on his sales. 
C) Write a C program in the menu driven style to perform the operations +, -, *, /, % between 
two given integers. 
 
 
4. A) i) Write three C programs to print a multiplication table for a given number using 
while, do-while, and for loops. 
ii) Write a C program to construct Pascal’s triangle. 
B) Write a C program to compute the sum of: 
i) 1+x+x2+x3+………….+xn, given x and n. 
ii) 1 – x2/2! + x4/4! – x6/6! + x8/8! – x10/10! + … to n terms where the nth term becomes 
less than 0.0001. 
5. A) Write C functions for the following: 
i) A function that takes an integer n as argument and returns 1 if it is a prime number and 
0 otherwise. 
ii) A function that takes a real number x and a positive integer n as arguments and returns 
xn. 
iii) A function that takes a positive integer n as an argument and returns the nth Fibonacci 
number. 
 
 
6. Using recursion write C functions for the following: 
i) Factorial of a non-negative integer n. 
ii) Greatest Common Divisor of two integers. 
 
 
7. A) Write a program to store the numbers given by the user in an array, and then to find the 
mean, deviations of the given values from the mean, and variance. 
B) Write a program to store user given numbers in an array and find the locations of 
minimum and maximum values in the array and swap them and display the resulting 
array. 
 
 
8.   A) Write a C program to implement the operations of matrices – addition, subtraction, 
multiplication 
B)  Write a C program that uses functions to perform the insertion of a substring into 
a given main string from a given position and delete n characters from a given 
position in a given string. 
C) i) Write a C program to determine whether a given string is palindrome or not. 
ii) Write a C program to count the lines, words and characters in a given text. 
 
 
9. A) Write a C program to swap two numbers using pointers. 
B) Define a structure and union for student having members roll no., name, class, 
section, marks. Create an array of 5 students and find the average marks for every 
student. 
 
 
10. A) Write a function which copies the contents of one file to another and display the file 
Contents 
B) Write a C program to reverse the first n characters in a file. 
C) Write a C program to merge two files into a third file. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to 
1.   Formulate the algorithms and can draw flowcharts for simple problems 
2.   Write conditional and iterative programs. 
3.   Develop the programs using sub functions and recursion. 
4.   Represent data in arrays, strings and can manipulate them. 
5.   Create files and perform simple operations like reading and writing on files. 
Text Books: 
1.   B.A. Forouzon and R.F. Gilberg, “COMPUTER SCIENCE: A Structured Programming 
Approach Using C”, Third edition, CENGAGE Learning, 2016. 
2.   Richard F. Gilberg & Behrouz A. Forouzan, “Data Structures: A Pseudocode Approach 
with C”, Second Edition, CENGAGE Learning, 2011. 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Pradip Dey and Manas Ghosh, Programming in C, Oxford University Press, 2nd Edition 
2011. 
2.   E. Balaguruswamy, “C and Data Structures”, 4th Edition, Tata Mc Graw Hill. 
3.   A. K. Sharma, Computer Fundamentals and Programming in C, 2nd Edition, University 
Press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II SEMESTER 
BTST1703:                                   PROBABILITY & STATISTICS                                 L  T  P  C 
3   1   0   4 
 
Course Description: 
Topics include averages, measures of variation, frequency distributions and probability 
functions associated with random variables, binomial distributions, sampling, the normal curve 
and statistical methods available for decision making. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To familiarize the students with the foundations of probability and statistical methods. 
2.   Summarize the basic concepts of data science and its importance in engineering. 
3.   To   impart   probability   concepts   and   statistical   methods   in   various   applications 
Engineering. 
4.   Compute conditional probabilities directly and using Baye’s theorem, and check for 
independence of events. 
5.   Understand the law of large numbers and the central limit theorem and how these concepts 
are used to model various random phenomena. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                              12 Hrs 
Descriptive Statistics: Statistics Introduction, Measures of Variability (dispersion), Skewness, 
Kurtosis, correlation, correlation coefficient, rank correlation, principle of least squares, 
method of least squares, regression lines, regression coefficients and their properties. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                            12 Hrs 
Probability: Probability, probability axioms, addition law and multiplicative law of 
probability, conditional probability, Baye’s theorem, random variables (discrete and 
continuous), probability density functions, properties. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                          12 Hrs 
Probability distributions:  Discrete distribution - Binomial, Poisson approximation to the 
binomial distribution and their properties. Continuous distribution: normal distribution and 
their properties. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                          12 Hrs 
Estimation and Testing of hypothesis, large sample tests: Estimation-parameters, statistics, 
sampling distribution, point estimation, Formulation of null hypothesis, alternative hypothesis, 
the critical and acceptance regions, level of significance, two types of errors and power of the 
test. Large Sample Tests: Test for single proportion, difference of proportions, test for single 
mean and difference of means. Confidence interval for parameters in one sample and two 
sample problems. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                            12 Hrs 
Small sample tests: Student t-distribution (test for single mean, two means and paired t-test), 
testing of equality of variances (F-test), χ2 - test for goodness of fit, χ2 - test for independence 
of attributes. 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon successful completion of this course, the student should be able to 
1.   Compute descriptive statistics using numerical techniques and explain the characteristics 
through correlation and regression tools. 
2.   Apply probability theory to find the chances of happening of events. 
3.   Understand various probability distributions and calculate their statistical moments. 
4.   Solve the problems on testing of hypothesis on large samples. 
5.   Solve the problems on testing of hypothesis on small samples. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Miller and Freunds, Probability and Statistics for Engineers, 7/e, Pearson, 2008. 
2.   S.C. Gupta and V.K. Kapoor, Fundamentals of Mathematical Statistics, 11/e, Sultan 
Chand & Sons Publications, 2012. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   S. Ross, a First Course in Probability, Pearson Education India, 2002. 
2.   W. Feller, an Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, 1/e, Wiley, 1968. 
3.   Peyton Z. Peebles, Probability, Random Variables & Random Signal Principles - 
McGraw Hill Education, 4th Edition, 2001. 
BTST1802:              BASIC ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING   L  T  P  C 
3   1   0   4 
 
Course Description: 
This course introduces to the concepts and definitions of Ohms law, KCL, KVL, power and 
energy. By applying Kirchhoff’s current and voltage laws to circuits in order to determine 
voltage, current and power in branches of any circuits excited by DC voltages and current 
sources. Apply simplifying techniques to solve DC circuit problems using basic circuit 
theorems and structured methods like node voltage and mesh current analysis. This course also 
introduces the basic electronics components like Logic gates, Flip lops etc. This course also 
introduces the construction and operating principle of AC machines, DC machines, Generators 
and Transformers. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To introduce the basics of electric circuits and DC Machines analysis 
2.   To impart knowledge in the basics of AC Fundamentals 
3.   To introduce analog devices and their characteristics 
4.   To educate on the fundamental concepts of digital electronics 
5.   To introduce the functional elements and working of measuring instruments 
 
 
UNIT I Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering and DC Machines:                       12 Hrs 
Ohm’s Law, Kirchhoff’s Laws, types of sources, passive elements. Series parallel circuits, 
mesh and nodal analysis. Superposition, Reciprocity theorem. 
DC Machines: Principle of operation of D.C generators, types, E.M.F equation.  Principle of 
operation of D.C motors, Types motors, Torque equation, Losses and efficiency, simple 
problems on D.C Generators and motors. 
 
 
UNIT II Fundamentals of AC circuits:                                                                        12 Hrs 
AC voltage wave form and basic definitions: Peak Value, R.M.S. value, Average values, Form 
factor and Peak factor, ’j’ operator, Analysis of single phase AC circuits series and parallel 
(Simple circuits). Three phase circuits – Star - delta connection, Relation between line and 
phase voltages / currents in a 3-phase Star-Delta balanced system 
 
 
UNIT III Induction Motors and Measuring Instruments:                                         12 Hrs 
Concept of Faraday’s laws, 3- phase induction motor working principle, operation and 
construction details. 
Instruments: Introduction, classification of instruments, operating principles, essential features 
of measuring instruments, permanent magnet moving coil (PMMC) instruments, moving iron 
(MI) instruments. 
 
 
UNIT IV Diode And Transistor:                                                                                  12 Hrs 
Overview of Semiconductors, PN junction diode and Zener diode –Diode circuits: rectifiers 
(bridge type only), filters, clippers and clampers. BJT construction, operation, characteristics 
(CB, CE and CC configurations) and uses – JFET and MOSFET construction, operation, 
characteristics (CS configuration) and uses. 
  
UNIT V Digital Electronics:                                                                                          12 Hrs 
Number systems – binary codes –binary arithmetic - Boolean algebra, laws & theorems - 
simplification of Boolean expression using K maps - logic gates - implementation of Boolean 
expressions using logic gates - standard forms of Boolean expression. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
On successful completion of the course, the students will be able to – 
1. Understand the basic terminology/definitions of electrical and electronics engineering  
2. Apply the knowledge of theorems/laws to analyze the simple circuits  
3. Use the principles of electromagnetic induction in electrical applications.  
4. Construct and analyze simple AC circuits.  
5. Select the electrical machines for different applications.  
 
Text Books: 
1. Basic  Electrical  Engineering  –T.K.  Nagesarkar  and  M.S.  Sukhja,  Oxford  University 
Press.2nd edition. 
2. Basic Electrical & Electronics Engineering –T.K. Nagesarkar and M.S. Sukhja, Oxford 
University Press.2nd edition. 
3. Principles of Electronics - V. K. Mehta, S. Chand Publications, 2nd edition. 
 
 
References Books: 
1.   Theory and problems of Basic electrical Engineering- D. P. Kotahari & I. J. Nagrath 
PHI. 
2.   Electronic Devices and Circuits, Millman & Halkias, TMH publications. 
3.   Electrical Machinery Dr. P.S. Bimbhra, Khanna Publication First Edition 2021. 
BTST1301: DATA STRUCTURES L  T  P  C 
3   1  0   4 
Course Description: 
The basic idea to introduce this course is to make students to explore several techniques, 
algorithms to store, organize data and will include linked lists, stacks, queues, graphs and trees. 
Study and analyzing of the various data structures gives complete awareness to use them in 
various applications. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1.   Impart the basic concepts of data structures and expected to know the Abstract Data Type, 
and difference between linear and non-linear data structures 
2.   Learn implementing concepts about Stacks, Queues 
3.   Enable them to write algorithms for operations of various linked lists 
4.   Choose appropriate searching and sorting technique based on the problem to be solved 
5.   Understand basic concepts about trees, graphs and its applications 
UNIT I                                                                                                                             12 Hrs 
Introduction to Data Structures: Definition of Data Structures, Abstract Data Type, 
Classification of Data Structures- Linear and Non-Linear, Applications, Data Structure 
Operations: insertion, deletion, search, traversal. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                           12 Hrs 
Stacks and Queues: Stack ADT and its operations, Array representation of stacks, Stack 
applications - Reversing Data, Infix to Postfix Transformation, Postfix expression evaluation. 
Queue ADT and its Operations, Array representation of Queues, Queue Types: Circular 
Queues, Priority Queue, Dequeue, Applications of Queues. Dynamic Memory Allocation. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                          12 Hrs 
Linked Lists: Concepts of Linked Lists, Types of Linked Lists, Singly Linked lists: Operations 
& its implementation, Linked representations of Stacks & Queues, Concatenating two lists, 
Doubly Linked List: Operations & its implementation, Circularly Linked List, Application of 
Linked Lists. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                           12 Hrs 
Searching and Sorting: Searching: Linear Search and Binary Search Techniques. Sorting: 
objectives and properties of different sorting algorithms: Bubble Sort, Selection Sort, Insertion 
Sort, Quick Sort, Merge Sort, Heap Sort. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                            12 Hrs 
Trees and Graphs: Trees: Basic Tree Terminologies, Different types of Trees: Binary Trees, 
Binary Tree Traversals, Applications of Binary Trees, Binary Search Trees, Spanning Trees. 
Graphs: Basic Terminologies and Representations - Adjacency Matrix, Adjacency List, Graph 
Traversals, Applications. 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of this course student will be able to: 
1.   Demonstrate the concepts of Abstract data type and can differentiate different between 
linear and non-linear data structures. 
2.   Implement Stacks and Queues for a given problem. 
3.   Create programs for Linked lists using various operations. 
4.   Select the data structure that efficiently model the information in a problem 
5.   Describe the concepts of trees, graphs and their applications. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Richard Gilberg, Behrouz Forouzan, ―Data Structures: A P seudocode Approach with C 
(Data Structures Series), Second Edition, Cengage Learning, 2004. 
2.   Gav Pai, ―Data Structures and Algorithms – Concepts, Techniques and Applications‖, 
Tata McGraw Hill, 2008. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   A. A. Puntambekar, ―Data Structures Using C, First Edition, Technical Publications, 
2009. 
2.   E Balagurusamy, ―Data Structures Using C, Tata McGraw-Hill Education, 2013. 
BTST1302: PYTHON PROGRAMMING L  T  P  C 
3   1  0   4 
Course Description: 
This course was introduced to make students to learn Python language and programming 
constructs like loops, conditionals, data structures, and modules. Familiarizes the various tools 
to run and write Python scripts, and student can develop code quickly, it dives deeper into 
essential programming topics which helps the students to solve the complex real time problems. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1.   Know the basic concepts of python and to run the python scripts 
2.   Develop python programs with different operators, conditions and loops 
3.   Use python data structures sequences 
4.   Define and create python functions, modules, packages and make use of them 
5.   Learn object oriented programming concepts 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                              12 Hrs 
Introduction:  History  of  Python,  Need  of  Python  Programming, Applications  Basics  of 
Python Programming Using the REPL(Shell), Running Python Scripts, Variables, Assignment, 
Keywords, Input-Output, Indentation. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                           12 Hrs 
Types, Operators and Expressions: Types - Integers, Strings, Booleans; Operators- 
Arithmetic Operators, Comparison (Relational) Operators, Assignment Operators, Logical 
Operators, Bitwise Operators, Membership Operators, Identity Operators, Expressions and 
order of evaluations Control Flow- if, if-elif-else, for, while, break, continue, pass. 
 
UNIT III 12 Hrs 
Data Structures: Lists - Operations, Slicing, Methods; Tuples, Sets, Dictionaries, Sequences. 
Comprehensions, strings and basic operations of strings. 
UNIT IV 12 Hrs 
Functions: Defining Functions, Calling Functions, Passing Arguments, Keyword Arguments, 
Default Arguments, Variable-length arguments, Anonymous Functions, Fruitful Functions 
(Function  Returning  Values),  Scope of the Variables  in  a Function  - Global  and  Local 
Variables. 
Modules: Creating modules, import statements, from. Import statement, name spacing. 
Python packages: Introduction to PIP, Installing Packages via PIP, Using Python Packages. 
 
 
UNIT V 12 Hrs 
Object Oriented Programming OOP in Python: Classes, 'self-variable', Methods, Constructor 
Method, Inheritance, Overriding Methods, Data hiding, 
Error and Exceptions: Difference between an error and Exception, Handling Exception, try 
except block, Raising Exceptions, User Defined Exceptions. 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1.   Develop and run simple Python programs for solving problems 
2.   Demonstrate the python programs using various basic concepts 
3.   Represent compound data using Python lists, tuples, and dictionaries 
4.   Install python packages and can create and decompose python programs into functions 
and modules 
5.   Demonstrate the object oriented concepts 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Python Programming: A Modern Approach, Vamsi Kurama, Pearson. 
2.   Learning Python, Mark Lutz, Orielly. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Think Python, Allen Downey, Green Tea Press. 
2.   Core Python Programming, W.Chun, Pearson. 
3.   Introduction to Python, Kenneth A. Lambert, Cengage. 
TAUT1102                                 ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES                              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides degree-seeking students with an array of opportunities to learn, practice 
and motivate communities on environmental importance. It further helps to understand the 
resources, optimize the recourses in future days, and address the gaps in the eco system. 
 
Course Objectives:  
Students undergoing this course are expected to:  
1. Understand eco system and scope of multidisciplinary 
2. Creating the awareness about environmental problems among people.  
3. Imparting basic knowledge about the environment and its allied problems. 
4. Developing an attitude of concern for the environment. 
5. Understand the developments in global goals 
Unit-I                    8 Hrs 
Multidisciplinary nature of environmental studies; Definition, scope and importance; 
Need for public awareness; Natural Resources: Renewable and non-renewable resources; 
Forest resources: Water resources: Mineral resources; Food resources: Energy resources: 
Land resources; Equitable use of resources for sustainable lifestyles; Natural resources and 
associated problems. 
 
Unit-II                     8 Hrs 
Ecosystems: Concept of an ecosystem.; Introduction, types, characteristic features, structure 
and function of the following ecosystem: - Forest ecosystem; Grassland ecosystem; Desert 
ecosystem; Aquatic ecosystems (ponds, streams, lakes, rivers, oceans, estuaries); 
Environment Protection Act,1986; Public awareness.; Environment and human health.  
 
Unit-III                     8 Hrs 
Biodiversity and its conservation: Introduction – Definition- genetic, species and ecosystem 
diversity.; Biogeographical classification of India; India as a mega-diversity nation; Hot
sports of biodiversity.; Threats to biodiversity: habitat loss, poaching of wildlife, man-wildlife 
conflicts.; Endangered and endemic species of India; Conservation of biodiversity: In-situ and 
Ex-situ conservation of biodiversity. 
 
Unit- IV                    8 Hrs 
Environmental Pollution Definition; Cause, effects and control measures of Air pollution; 
Water pollution; Soil pollution; Marine pollution; Noise pollution; Thermal pollution and 
nuclear hazards - Solid waste Management: Causes, effects and control measures of urban 
and industrial wastes. -  Role of an individual in prevention of pollution - Disaster 
management: floods, earthquake, cyclone and landslides. 
  
 
Unit-V                       8 Hrs 
Social Issues and the Environment: From Unsustainable to Sustainable development; Water 
conservation- rain water harvesting- watershed management; Resettlement and rehabilitation 
of people; its problems and concerns.; Environmental ethics: Issues and possible solutions.; 
Climate change, global warming, acid rain, ozone layer depletion, nuclear accidents and 
holocaust - Wasteland reclamation.; Consumerism and waste products.; Population and 
environment. 
Field work                               5 Hrs 
Field visits to nearby; awareness campaign; special lectures by experts; quiz, debate 
competitions, short film Contest, rally etc 
           
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of this course, students should be able to:   
1. Understand key concepts from economic, political, and social analysis as they pertain 
to the design and evaluation of environmental policies and institutions. 
2. Appreciate concepts and methods from ecological and physical sciences and their 
application in environmental problem solving. 
3. Appreciate the ethical, cross-cultural, and historical context of environmental issues 
and the links between human and natural systems. 
4. Reflect critically about their roles and identities as citizens, consumers and 
environmental activists 
5. Be part in Development goals and educating the communities. 
                                                                                            
Text Books:  
1. Textbook of Environmental Studies (English, Paperback, Asthana D. K.) S.Chand & co , New 
Delhi 
2. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses, Erach B Haruchu, UGC, 
KINDLE Edition, Amazon. 
 Reference Book: 
1. Encyclopedia of Environment and Society- set of 5 volumes, Sage Publications 
TAUT1202C             HINDI                                                   L T  P C 
                                                                                                                                  3  0 0 3 
Course Description: 
बच्चों में हिन्दी पढ़ने, लिखने की क्षमता बढ़ाना । आपस में अपनी भावनाओं को प्रकट करने की क्षमता बढ़ाना 
मुख्य उद्देश्य िै। 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. संज्ञा, संज्ञा के प्रकार,सववनाम, सववनाम के प्रकार, क्रिया, क्रिया के प्रकार, िर्शेषण, िर्शेषण के         
   प्रकार 
2. लिंग, वचन, काि, वाच्य, अर्व, वविोम र्शब्द, र्शब्दों का वाक्य में प्रयोग 
3. हिंदी सीखने की आश्यवकता बताते िुए छोटी बिन के नाम पर पत्र।,  
  वविार यात्रा का वणवन करते िुए अपने ममत्र के नाम पत्र।, 
  र्शूल्क भरने के लिए पैसे भेजने अपने िपता के नाम पत्र। 
4. कफन - प्रेमचंद, वापसी - उषा वप्रयम्वदा यर्शपाि – परदा 
5. यरकान्त त्रत्रपाठी ननरािा - जूिी की किी,मिादेवी वमाव - मैं नीर भरी दुख की बदिी,       
 सुममत्रानंदन पंत - भारत माता    
 
UNIT-I     9 Hrs 
1. संज्ञा, संज्ञा के प्रकार 
2. सववनाम, सववनाम के प्रकार 
3. क्रिया, क्रिया के प्रकार 
4. ववर्शेषण, ववर्शेषण के प्रकार 
 
UNIT-II            9 Hrs 
1. लिंग,वचन, काि,कारक  
2. अर्व, वविोम र्शब्द 
3. र्शब्दों का वाक्य में प्रयोग 
 
UNIT-III    (पत्र लेखन )                        9Hrs 
1. हिंदी सीखने की आवश्यकता बताते िुए छोटी बिन के नाम पर पत्र। 
2. वविार यात्रा का वणवन करते िुए अपने लमत्र के नाम पत्र। 
3. र्शूल्क भरने के लिए पैसे भेजने अपने वपता के नाम पत्र। 
 
UNIT-IV  ( कहानी और कहानीकार)                                                                          9 Hrs 
1. कफन  - प्रेमचंद          
2. वापसी - उषा वप्रयम्वदा 
3. यर्शपाि – परदा 
 
 
UNIT-V (कवि और कविता )                                                                                           9 Hrs 
1. सूयवकांत त्रत्रपाठी ननरािा - जूिी की कािी 
2. मिादेवी वमाव - मैं नीर भरी दुख की बदिी 
3. सुलमत्रानंदन पंत - भारत माता  
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. बच्चों में पढने का क्षमता बढाना 
2. लिखने की क्षमता बढाना 
3. बोिने की क्षमता बढाना 
4. भाषा के प्रित रुिच उत्पन्न कराना 
5. दैनंददन जीनव में भाषा का प्रयोग करना 
 
Text Books: 
1. हिन्दी व्याकरण 
2. हिश्वनाथ हििारी की हििंदी कहििा 
3. प्रेमचिंद की किाननयां 
 
Reference Books: 
ववववधि प्रकार के किानी और व्याकरण के क्रकताबें संदभव ग्रंर् सूची 
1. हिन्दी व्याकरण -कांता रानी मंजूषा,िरदेव त्रबिारी 
2.ववश्वनाद प्रसाद नतवारी - हिंदी कववता  
3.ववश्वनाद प्रसाद नतवारी- आिुननक हिंदी कववता 
4.पुष्पपाि लसंि - समकािीन हिंदी कववता 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1202D                               PROFESSIONAL ENGLISH            L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course aims to enhance the English language proficiency of engineering students in 
professional contexts. Through a combination of theoretical knowledge and practical exercises, 
students will develop their skills in technical writing, oral communication, presentation, and 
critical thinking. The course will focus on various aspects of professional communication, 
including report writing, academic writing, technical presentations, and effective 
communication in interdisciplinary teams. Additionally, students will engage with real-world 
engineering scenarios to apply language skills in practical contexts. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Develop proficiency in technical writing for engineering reports, research proposals, and 
documentation. 
2. Enhance oral communication skills for effective presentations, meetings, and discussions 
and thereby improve their employability skills. 
3. Improve critical thinking and analytical skills through the evaluation of technical 
information and arguments. 
4. Foster teamwork, collaboration skills in interdisciplinary engineering projects. 
5. Develop awareness of cultural and linguistic diversity in professional settings. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Pronunciation: Course techniques include recordings, partner work, group activities and one
on-one instructor feedback. Your speech will become clearer, more fluent and easier to 
understand. You'll improve your enunciation of individual sounds, intonation, stress patterns, 
pace and pausing.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Speaking Professionally: You’ll build greater confidence through individual work, group 
interaction and feedback from your peers and instructor. To express yourself more clearly and 
concisely, whether you are speaking in impromptu situations or making well-planned 
Presentations. Focus on language that familiarizes you with the use of English in everyday 
situations and contexts. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Refine Your Grammar: Express yourself more accurately and eloquently by improving your 
English Grammar. You’ll get the strong foundation you need to write and speak more clearly, 
precisely and persuasively. You’ll explore the relationship between words in sentences, and 
analyse structure and meaning, clarify common problem points and improve punctuation. You’ll 
have the opportunity to practice with your peers and get helpful feedback. You’ll also learn 
what resources are best for ongoing grammar help. You’ll apply them to produce effective, 
concise written work with newfound confidence. You’ll express yourself more clearly and 
persuasively by using varied, well-structured sentences and placing content more strategically. 
You’ll also develop editing skills to rid your work of errors.  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Writing Essentials – Professional Writing  
Improve your written English for personal, professional and academic purposes. You’ll refine 
your sentence structure, punctuation and verb tenses, and eliminate the most common errors that 
confuse readers. You’ll enhance your writing style. Develop editing skills that help you revise 
your work.  Lectures, discussions, e-learning tools and assignments will help you develop the 
communication skills you’ll need in today’s business environment.  
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
You’ll be equipped to create power packed Power Point Presentations. Be in better stead to 
introducing yourself. To know the nuances that goes into the presenting of information, and 
articulating information. Know how to make an impressive introduction. To imbibe Life Skills 
that is necessary to lead a fruitful and a fulfilling life. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course the student will be able: 
1. To understand the importance of Professional English in work place and learn the correct 
pronunciation and delivery of speech. 
2. To read technical proposals properly and make them to write good technical reports. 
3. To achieve better comprehending skills, vocabulary and professional speaking skills. 
4. To learn and identify the Common Errors in Writing and Speaking. 
5. Acquire digital competence, employment and workplace communication skills. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Technical Communication: Process and Product by Sharon J. Gerson and Steven M. Gerson 
2. Engineering Communication: From Principles to Practice by David Ingre, C. O'Brien 
3. Technical Writing Basics: A Guide to Style and Form by Brian R. Holloway 
 
Reference Books: 
1. The Encyclopaedia Britannica" - A comprehensive general encyclopaedia covering a wide range 
of topics. 
2. The Oxford English Dictionary (OED)" - A comprehensive dictionary of the English language. 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1202A                                             FRENCH                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to French by intensively studying important aspects of 
pronunciation, vocabulary, grammar and sentence formation through practice sets and audio 
visual lessons. It introduces the workings and sounds of the language and provides the necessary 
tools to enable students to make sentences from scratch. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To train the students to know about France, French culture and basics 
2. To teach them to learn basic grammar and vocabulary. 
3. To train them to learn tenses in French 
4. To train them to talk about their daily routine 
5. To train them to converse in French in day-to-day scenarios 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Introduction to France and its regions - French alphabets and numbers, countries and 
nationality 
Grammaire – Verbs  – s’appeler, être, avoir, definite and indefinite articles 
Communication – Greetings, Self Introduction 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Basic vocabulary, colours, months and days 
Grammaire - Verbes - Conjugation : Present tense (ER, IR, RE ending verbs) – Adjective 
possesive Communication – Talk about family and friends, date, time etc. 
   
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Hobbies, interests and daily routine 
Grammaire – Irregular verbs – Releflexive verbs - Future proche  
Communication – Talking about hobbies and interests                  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Vocabulary of places and  transport  
Grammaire – Pertinent verbs, adjective demonstrative, past tense, propositions 
Communication – Narrating an incident or story                   
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Vocabulary of food, services, money 
Grammaire – Negation, Verbs – acheter, manger, payer, articles partitifs. Communication – 
Accept and refuse an invitation, situation in a restaurant 
                          
Course Outcomes: 
After the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Acquire familiarity in the French alphabet & basic vocabulary 
2. Listen and identify individual sounds of French  
3. Use basic sounds and words while speaking 
4. Read and understand simple advertisements, brochures and invitations  
5. Understand and use basic grammar and appropriate vocabulary in completing language tasks 
 
  
Text Books:  
1. Grammaire Progressive du Français, CLÉ International, 2010. 
2. Saison 1, Marie-Noëlle Cocton et al, Didier, 2014. 
3. Cosmopolite A1 - Nathalie Hirschsprung, Tony Tricot 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Préparation à l’examen du DELF A1 – Hachette 
2. Réussir le DELF A1 – Bruno Girardeau  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1202B                                                GERMAN                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: German Language Training  
Course Objectives: 
1. Importance of German Language in Global prospective 
2. To develop Reading skills for Basic Level 
3. German writing skills, particularly emails & short messages  
4. To develop basic German Speaking skills in order to meet the General activities 
5. Listening practise to understand German Accent of the Native German Speakers 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
GUTEN TAG!: Saying hello and goodbye, introducing oneself and others, talking  about 
oneself and others, numbers 1-20, spelling words and names, talking about countries and 
languages, the alphabet, first  verbs in present tense, how to ask questions, useful terms and 
expressions                 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
FRUENDE, KOLLEGEN UND ICH: Talking about hobbies, days of the week, numbers from 
20 on up, months and seasons in the year, talking about work and job, definite article, personal 
pronouns, the verbs to have (haben) and to be (sein), plurals of nouns. 
        
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs
   
IN DER STADT: Getting around a town and asking for the way, giving directions, indefinite 
articles, negation with kein, imperative forms.        
 
UNIT- IV                                                                                                                                9 Hrs  
GUTEN APPETIT!: Talking about food, planning a trip to the grocery store, food and meals 
and talking about it, verbs that require the accusative       
 
UNIT- V                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
TAG FÜR TAG: Telling and understanding time, talking about one's family, possessive 
articles (mein, dein) and modal auxiliaries (müssen, können, wollen).   
                    
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic Reading skills 
2. Basic Writing skills with basic Grammar 
3. Speaking skills and to do advance German Course 
4. Understanding basic German for Daily Communication  
5. Awareness of European Union and opportunities in Europe 
 
Text Books:  
1. A1-German Level- Netzwerk A1 Book- Prescribed by International Institute- Goethe Institute 
Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BTSL1802: BASIC ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING LAB L  T  P   C 
0   0   2   1 
Course Description: 
In this lab, the students of all engineering streams are trained on basic concepts of electrical 
engineering. such as AC to DC conversion, measurement, transformer, verification of basic laws 
and theorems, use of CRO, DSO, etc. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.  Understand the Thevenin’s networks. 
2. DC Machines Speed Control, Brake test, No load test, simple test on single phase 
transformer and 3-phase Induction motor.  
3. Understand the nature and scope of modern electronics, describe physical models of basic 
components, design and construct simple electronic circuits to accomplish a specific 
function. 
4. Identify, Specify and test Active Devices, Diodes, BJTs, Low power JFETs. 
5. Verify the Transistor CE characteristics and application as an amplifier. 
 
 
 
Part A: Electrical experiments 
1. Verification of Thevenin’s Theorem.  
2. Speed control of DC shunt motor by: a) Armature Voltage Control 
 b) Field flux control method. 
3. Brake test on DC shunt motor. 
4. Swinburn’s test on DC shunt machine. 
5. OC & SC tests on Single – Phase transformer (Predetermination of efficiency and 
 regulation at given power factors).  
6. Brake test on 3-phase induction motor (performance characteristics).  
 
 
 
Part B: (Electronics Laboratory experiments) 
1.   Identification of various electronic components and Devices 
Specifications, Testing of R, L, C Components (Colour Codes), Potentiometers, Bread 
Boards. 
2.   Identification and Specifications of Active Devices like Diodes, BJTs, JFET etc. 
Study and operation of 
3.   Digital Multi meters 
4.   Function Signal Generator 
5.   Regulated Power Supplies 
6.   Study and Operation of CRO: Measurement of amplitude and frequency. Time Period 
measurement 
7.   PN Junction and Zener diode characteristics   A. Forward bias B. Reverse bias. 
8.   Half wave and Full wave Rectifiers. 
9.   Transistor CE characteristics (Input and Output) 
10. FET characteristics 
11. CE Amplifier 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completing this course, the student will be able to: 
1. Understand the Thevenin’s Theorem in circuit analysis, speed control methods of DC 
motor with and without loading along with performance, working of single-phase 
transformer at no load conditions, the performance of three phase induction motor, 
different.  
2. Identify, Specify and test R, L, C Components (Color Codes), Potentiometers, Switches, 
Coils, Relays. 
3. Explain and demonstrate working of PN Junction and Zener diode. 
4. Explain and demonstrate working Half and Full wave Rectifier without filters. 
5. Demonstrate working of CE characteristics and its application as an amplifier. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Ashfaq Hussain, Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering, Dhanpatrai & Co. (P) Ltd., 
3rdedition, New Delhi, 2009. 
2. B.L. Theraja, A.K. Theraja, A Text book of Electrical Technology, Volume 1, S Chand 
Technical Publications, First edition,2005. 
 
References Books: 
1. D. Roy Chowdhury, Linear Integrated Circuits, New Age International Pvt. Ltd., 4th 
edition, 2011. 
2. Principles of Electronics - V. K. Mehta, S. Chand Publications, 2nd edition. 
3.  R. L. Boylestad and Louis Nashelsky, Electronics Devices and Circuits, PHI, 11th edition, 
2009. 
 
 
BTSL1301: DATA STRUCTURES LAB L  T  P  C 
0   0   2   1 
 
Course Description: 
 
This lab course is intended to make students to implement various techniques, algorithms 
of data structures which can make them more effective designer, developer. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
The main objective of conducting this lab is to enable the students to: 
 
1. Get practical knowledge of data structures learned in the class room. 
 
2. Extend programming ability using a structured programming approach. 
 
3. Build and manipulate linear and non-linear data structures, including stacks, queues, 
linked lists, trees and graphs. 
4. Choose the appropriate data structure to use in solving the typical computer science 
problems. 
5. Choose the appropriate data structure to use in solving the typical computer science 
problems. 
Exercises: 
1. Write a C program that implements Stack & Queue operations using arrays 
2. Write a C program that uses Stack operations to perform the 
following a) Converting Infix expression to Postfix expression. 
b) Evaluating the Postfix expression. 
3. Write a C program that implements Circular Queue and Dequeue operations using Arrays. 
4. Write a C program that implements Stack & Queue operations using Pointers 
5. Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following operations on singly 
linked list. 
i) Creation ii) Insertion iii) Deletion iv) Traversal 
6. Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following operations on doubly 
linked list. 
i) Creation ii) Insertion iii) Deletion iv) Traversal 
7. Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following operations on circular 
linked list. 
i) Creation ii) Insertion iii) Deletion iv) Traversal 
8. Write C programs that use both recursive and non recursive functions to perform 
the following searching operations for a Key value in a given list of integers: 
i) Linear search ii) Binary search 
9. Write a C program that implements the following sorting methods to sort a given list 
of integers in ascending order 
i) Bubble sort ii) Selection sort iii) Insertion sort iv) Merge Sort v) Quick sort 
  
 
10. A) Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following Binary Tree 
Traversals a) Inorder b) Preorder c) Postorder 
B) Write a C program to implement the following graph 
traversals a) Depth-First Search b) Breadth- First Search 
Course Outcomes: 
 
After Completing this lab, the student must be able to: 
 
1.   Demonstrate the algorithms of various data structures. 
 
2.   Emphasize the specification of each data structure as an abstract data type before 
discussing implementations and application of the structure. 
3.   Aware of the importance of dynamic allocation and operations of linked lists. 
 
4.   Solve the problems by selecting appropriate searching and sorting method. 
 
5.   Traverse the binary tree and graph. 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
 
1.   Data Structures: A Pseudo code Approach with C, 2nd Edition, R. F. Gilberg and B. A. 
 
Forouzan, Cengage Learning. 
 
 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1.   Fundamentals of Data Structures in C, 2nd Edition, E. Horowitz, S. Sahni and 
 
2.   Susan Anderson Freed, Universities Press. 
 
3.   Data Structures using C – A. S. Tanenbaum, Y. Langsam, and M. J. Augenstein, 
PHI/Pearson Education. 
BTSL1302: PYTHON PROGRAMMING LAB L  T  P  C 
0   0  2   1 
Course Description: 
This lab provides coding exercises on various commonly used concepts like, data structures, 
writing custom functions, and reading and writing to files. With the gain of the knowledge 
the students can solve the real-world problems quickly using python constructs and can 
develop simple html pages. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of conducting this lab is to enable the students to: 
1.   Understand python programming basics and paradigm. 
2.   Learn and develop python looping, control statements and string manipulations. 
3.   Get familiar with the concepts of data structures and should organize, retrieve the data. 
4.   Know the concepts of file handling and modular programming. 
5.  Develop the programs using multi dimension lists and creation of simple html pages. 
 
1. Basics & operations 
a) Running instructions in Interactive interpreter and a Python Script. 
b) Write a program to purposefully raise Indentation Error and correct it. 
c) Write a program to compute distance between two points taking input from the user 
(Pythagorean Theorem). 
d) Write a program add.py that takes 2 numbers as command line arguments and prints its 
sum. 
2. Control Flow 
a) Write a Program for checking whether the given number is a even number or not. 
b) Using a for loop, write a program that prints out the decimal equivalents of 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, 
. . . ,1/10. 
c) Write a program using a for loop that loops over a sequence. What is sequence? 
d) Write a program using a while loop that asks the user for a number, and prints a 
countdown from that number to zero. 
3. Control Flow - Continued 
a) Find the sum of all the primes below 200. 
Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous two terms. 
By 
starting with 1 and 2, the first 10 terms will be: 
1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89,... 
b) By considering the terms in the Fibonacci sequence whose values do not exceed 400, find 
the sum of the even-valued terms. 
4. DS 
a) Write a program to count the numbers of characters in the string and store them in a 
dictionary data structure 
b) Write a program to use split and join methods in the string and trace a birthday with a 
dictionary data structure. 
c) Write a program combining lists that combines these lists into a dictionary. 
d) Write a program to count the frequency of characters in a given file. Can you use character 
frequency to tell whether the given file is a Python program file, C program file or a text file? 
5. Files 
a) Write a program to print each line of a file in reverse order. 
b) Write a program to compute the number of characters, words and lines in a file. 
6. Functions 
a) Write a function ball collide that takes two balls as parameters and computes if they are 
colliding. Your function should return a Boolean representing whether or not the balls are 
colliding. 
Hint: Represent a ball on a plane as a tuple of (x, y, r), r being the radius 
If (distance between two balls centers) <= (sum of their radii) then (they are colliding) 
b) Find mean, median, mode for the given set of numbers in a list. 
7. Functions - Continued 
a) Write a function nearly equal to test whether two strings are nearly equal. Two strings a 
and b are nearly equal when a can be generated by a single mutation on b. 
b) Write a function dups to find all duplicates in the list. 
c) Write a function unique to find all the unique elements of a list. 
8. Functions - Problem Solving 
a) Write a function cumulative product to compute cumulative product of a list of numbers. 
b) Write a function reverse to reverse a list. Without using the reverse function. 
c) Write a function to compute gcd,lcm of two numbers. Each function shouldn’t exceed 
one line. 
9. Multi-D Lists 
a) Write a program that defines a matrix and prints. 
b) Write a program to perform addition of two square matrices. 
c) Write a program to perform multiplication of two square matrices. 
10 - Modules 
a) Install packages requests, flask and explore them using (pip). 
b) Write a script that imports requests and fetches content from the page Eg. (Wiki). 
c) Write a simple script that serves a simple HTTP Response and a simple HTML Page. 
Course Outcomes: 
 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
 
1.   Acquire the knowledge to develop basic Python scripts. 
 
2.   Implement the python scripts using conditional and looping statements. 
 
3.   Format the data and can organize, retrieve, modify the data easily. 
 
4.   Manipulate the files and can simplify the code by modularizing. 
 
5.   Install packages and can write scripts to develop simple HTML pages. 
 
References: 
 
1.   Think Python, Allen Downey, Green Tea Press. 
 
2.   Core Python Programming, W.Chun, Pearson. 
 
3.   Introduction to Python, Kenneth A. Lambert, Cengage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III SEMESTER 
BTST2701: Mathematical Foundations of Cyber Security L  T  P  C 
3   1   0   4 
 
Prerequisite: Basic Mathematics 
 
Course Description: 
 
This course introduces different mathematical concepts in cyber security. The cryptographic 
algorithms designed by some mathematical algorithms, to use the different keys. Number 
theory is well versed area in the cyber security. This course studies with strong math 
background to improve Strong analytics skills that needed. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
The students will try to learn: 
 
1. The concepts of number theory and its applications to information security. 
 
2. The concept of congruences and its basic properties. 
 
3. The security model and analyse them before being used in many commercial, industrial as 
well as web application. 
 
4. The knowledge of encryption and decryption techniques and their applications in 
managing the security of data. 
 
5. The general understanding of cyber security relationship with numbers. 
 
UNIT-I 12 Hrs. 
Integers, Greatest common divisors and prime Factorization: 
The well-ordering property-Divisibility-Representation of integers-Computer operations with 
integers-Prime numbers-Greatest common divisors-The Euclidean algorithm -The 
fundamental theorem of arithmetic-Factorization of integers and the Fermat numbers-Linear 
Diophantine equations 
UNIT-II 12 Hrs. 
Congruences: 
Introduction  to  congruences  -Linear  congruences-The  Chinese  remainder  theorem- 
 
Systems of linear congruences 
 
UNIT-III 12 Hrs. 
Applications of Congruences: 
Divisibility tests-The perpetual calendar-Round-robin tournaments-Computer file storage 
and hashing functions. Wilson's theorem and Fermat's little theorem- Pseudo primes- 
Euler's theorem- Euler's p hi-function- The sum and number of divisors- Perfect numbers 
and Mersenne primes. 
 
UNIT-IV 12 Hrs. 
Finite fields & Primality, factoring: 
Finite fields- quadratic residues and reciprocity-Pseudo primes-rho method-Fermat 
factorization and factor bases. 
UNIT-V 12 Hrs. 
Cryptology: 
Basic terminology - Character Ciphers - Block Ciphers-Exponentiation ciphers - Public-key 
cryptography - Discrete Logarithm-Knapsack ciphers - RSA algorithm-Some applications to 
computer science. 
Course Outcomes: 
 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
 
1.   Understand number theory and its properties. 
 
2.   Understand principles on congruences. 
 
3.   Develop the knowledge to apply various applications. 
 
4.   Utilize finite fields, rho method and Fermat factorization. 
 
5.   Develop various encryption methods and its applications. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1.   Kenneth  H  Rosen  “Elementary  number  theory  and  its  applications”,  AT  &  T 
 
Information systems & Bell laboratories. 
 
2.   Neal Koblitz “A course in Number theory & Cryptography”, Springer. 
 
3.   Niven, H.S. Zuckerman and H. L. Montgomery, “An Introduction to the Theory of 
 
Numbers”, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1.   Herbert S. Zuckerman, “An Introduction to The Theory of Numbers”, Hugh L. 
 
Montgomery, Ivan Niven, Wiley publishers 
 
2.   Tom M Apostol “Introduction to Analytic number theory”, Springer 
 
3.   V K Krishnan “Elementary number theory”, Universities press 
 
4.   Leigh  Metcalf,  William  Casey,  “Cybersecurity  and  Applied  Mathematics”, 
 
Syngress Publisher(s). 
BTST2301: Design and Analysis of Algorithms L  T  P  C 
3   1  0   4 
 
Prerequisite: Data 
Structures 
 
Course 
Description: 
 
Design and analysis of algorithms is the process of finding the computational complexity of 
algorithms. It helps to design and analyse the logic on how the algorithm will work before 
developing the actual code for a program. It focuses on introduction to algorithm, asymptotic 
complexity, sorting and searching using divide and conquer, greedy method, dynamic 
programming, backtracking, branch and bound. NP-hard and NP-complete problems. The 
applications of algorithm design are used for information storage, retrieval, transportation 
through networks, and presentation to users. 
Course Objectives: 
 
1.   To analyze the asymptotic performance of algorithms. 
 
2.   To apply important algorithmic design paradigms and methods of analysis. 
 
3.   To synthesize efficient algorithms in common engineering design situations. 
 
4.   Methods and techniques for analyzing the correctness and resource requirements 
of algorithms. 
5. To familiarize the concepts of deterministic and non-deterministic algorithms. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                            12 Hrs 
 
Introduction 
 
Algorithm - Pseudo Code for Expressing Algorithms - Performance Analysis- Space 
Complexity - Time Complexity- Asymptotic Notation - Big Oh Notation - Omega Notation - 
Theta Notation and Little Oh Notation. - Recurrences - Substitution method, Recursion-tree 
method, Master method. 
UNIT II                                                                                                                          12 Hrs 
 
Disjoint Sets, Divide and Conquer 
 
Disjoint Sets: Disjoint Set Operations - Union and find Algorithms 
 
Divide and Conquer: General Method - Applications-Binary Search – Quick Sort - Merge 
Sort- Strassen’s Matrix Multiplication. 
UNIT III                                                                                                                         12 Hrs 
 
Dynamic Programming 
 
General Method –Applications-Matrix Chain Multiplication - Multistage Graphs- 0/1 
Knapsack Problem - All Pairs Shortest Path Problem - Travelling Sales Person Problem – 
Reliability Design Problem. 
UNIT IV 12 Hrs 
 
Greedy Method and Backtracking 
 
Greedy Method: General Method –Applications- Job Sequencing with Deadlines - Knapsack 
Problem -Minimum Cost Spanning Trees- Single Source Shortest Path Problem 
Backtracking: 
General Method – Applications-N-Queens Problem - Sum of Subsets Problem - Graph  
Coloring - Hamiltonian Cycles. 
UNIT V 12 Hrs 
 
Branch and Bound, NP-Hard and NP-Complete Problems 
 
Branch And Bound: General Method - Applications - Travelling Sales Person Problem - 0/1 
 
Knapsack Problem- LC Branch and Bound Solution - FIFO Branch and Bound Solution. 
 
NP Hard and NP-Complete Problems: Basic Concepts - Non deterministic algorithms - 
NP – Hard and NP Complete Classes - Cook’s Theorem. 
 
Course Outcome: 
 
1. To gain knowledge of time complexity, space complexity and recurrence methods. 
 
2. To design searching and sorting algorithms along with divide and conquer method and disjoint 
sets. 
3. To apply Dynamic Programming design technique for problem solving. 
 
4. To apply Greedy and back tracing design technique for problem solving 
 
5. To understand the branch and bound algorithms for solving the complex problems 
 
Text Book(s) 
 
1.   Ellis Horowitz, Satraj Sahni, Sanguthevar Rajasekharan, “Fundamentals of Computer 
 
Algorithms”, Universities Press, 2nd Edition, 2015. 
 
2.   Alfred V. Aho, John E. Hopcroft, Jeffrey D, “The Design And Analysis Of Computer 
Algorithms”, Pearson India, 1st Edition, 2013. 
 
Reference Books 
 
1.   Knuth Donald E, “Art of Computer Programming: Fundamental Algorithms Volume 1 - 
 
Fundamental Algorithms”, Third Edition, Pearson Publishers, 2011. 
 
2.    Levitin A, “Introduction to the Design and Analysis of Algorithms”, Pearson Education, 
 
3rd Edition, 2012. 
 
3.    Thomas H. Cormen, C.E. Leiserson, R L.Rivest and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms 
 
, Third edition, MIT Press, 2009 
 
 
  
BTST2302: 
Object Oriented Programming through Java L  T  P  C 
3    
Prerequisite: Programming for Problem Solving 
0     0    3 
Course Description: The course introduces object-oriented programming (OOP) concept and 
OOP based software development methodology. In this course the students learn object
oriented nature of Java. Java is a class based and OOP language used to demonstrate and 
implement appropriate concepts and techniques. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of Object-Oriented Programming principles. 
2. Acquire knowledge of object-oriented paradigm in the Java programming language. 
3. Develop programs related to the concepts of Inheritance, Data Abstraction. 
4. Understand handling exceptions, streams and Collection Framework. 
5. Apply Java and it’s features in various applications in different platforms. 
UNIT I: An Overview of Java: 
Packages- Access Protection, Importing Packages, Interfaces, Default Interface Methods, 
Static Methods in Interfaces. 
10 
Hrs 
Evolution of java: Java’s Lineage, creation of Java, How Java changed the Internet, 
Concept of JVM, Java’s Magic: The byte code, Servlets, The Java Buzzwords, The 
Evolution of Java. An Overview of Java, Data types, Variables, and Arrays, Operators, 
Control statements.  
Introducing classes: 
Class Fundamentals, Enum, Declaring Objects, Introducing Methods, Constructors, This 
Keyword, Garbage Collection, The finalize() Method, A Stack Class. Overloading Methods 
and constructors, Using Object as Parameter, Argument Passing, Returning Objects, 
Recursion, Access control, static and final keywords, Introducing Nested and Inner classes, 
Using Command line Arguments, String Handling. 
UNIT II: 
Inheritance, Packages and Interfaces 
Inheritance: 
8 Hrs 
Inheritance Basics, Using Super, creating a Multilevel Hierarchy, Method Overriding, 
Dynamic Method Dispatch, Using Abstract Class, Using final with Inheritance, The Object 
Class. 
Packages and Interfaces: 
UNIT III: Exception Handling and Multithreading                                            9 Hrs 
Exception Handling: 
Exception handling Fundamentals, Exception Types, Uncaught Exceptions, Using try and 
catch, Multiple catch clauses, Nested try statements, throw, throws, finally, Java Built-in 
Exceptions, creating your own exception subclasses, Chained Exceptions, Three Recently 
added Exceptions features, Using Exceptions. 
Multithreading: The Java thread model, Main thread, Creating a Thread, Creating Multiple 
Thread, Thread priorities, Synchronizing threads, Inter-thread communication, 
Suspending, Resuming and Stopping Threads, Obtaining A Thread’s State. 
UNIT-IV: I/O and Collection Framework 9 Hrs 
I/O: Basics, Reading Console Input, Writing Console Output, The Print Writer Class, 
Reading and Writing Files, Automatically Closing a File. 
The Collections Framework: Collections overview, Collection Interfaces, The Collection 
classes- Array List, Linked List, Hash Set, Tree Set, Priority Queue, Array Deque. Accessing 
a Collection via an Iterator, Spliterators, Storing User-Defined Classes in Collections, 
Working with Maps, Comparators, Arrays, The Legacy Classes and Interfaces. 
 
UNIT-V:  Advanced Features of JDK8 and Data Base Connectivity 9 Hrs 
Introducing Lambda Expressions, Block Lambda Expression, Generic Functional Interfaces, 
Passing Lambda Expression and Exceptions, Passing, Stream Basics, Reduction Operations, 
Using Parallel Streams, Mapping, Collecting, Iterators and Streams, Exploring Streaming 
API. 
Regular Expressions: Regular Expression Processing 
Accessing Databases with JDBC- Introduction to JDBC Connectivity, Types of Drivers, 
basic steps in developing JDBC applications, Creating a new database and table with JDBC. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Understand  the  basics  of  java  programming  like  variables,  operators,  and  control 
statements. 
2.   Design and implement object oriented (OO) programs to solve problems. 
3.   Analyse the importance of Inheritance and learn how to implement data abstraction. 
4.   Understand the concept of Exception Handling and streams. 
5.   Learn to implement the concept of Collection Framework, Lambda and Stream API. 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.  ” Java the Complete Reference”, Herbert Schildt, MCGRAW HILL Education, 9th 
Edition,2016. 
2.  “Understanding Object – Oriented Programming with Java”, T. Budd, updated edition, 
Pearson Education, 2000. 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   “Programming with Java” T.V.Suresh Kumar, B.Eswara Reddy, P.Raghavan Pearson 
Edition. 
2.   “Object Oriented Programming through Java”, P. Radha Krishna, 1st edition, Universities 
Press, 2007. 
3.   Core Java, Volume 1-Fundamentals, eighth edition, Cay S.Horstmann and Gary Cornell, 
Pearson education. 
4.   “An Introduction to programming and OO Design using Java”, updated edition, Pearson 
Education, 2000. 
BTST2801: Digital Logic Design L  T  P  C 
3   0   0   3 
 
Prerequisite: Basic Electronics 
Course Description 
Foundation in design and analysis of the operation of digital gates. Design and implementation 
of combinational and sequential logic circuits. Concepts of Boolean algebra, Karnaugh maps, 
flip-flops, registers, and counters and VHDL Programming for Digital Circuits. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Provides introduction to logic designs and the basic building blocks used in digital systems. 
2. To understand the number systems and codes, Boolean algebra, and logic gates. 
3. To minimize the logical functions using Boolean algebra, K-maps, tabular method, and also 
to understand combinational circuits. 
4. To understand different sequential circuits and different Arithmetic circuits. 
5. To understand VHDL programming for digital circuits 
 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                8 Hrs 
Number Systems and Codes: Decimal, Binary, Octal, and Hexa-decimal number systems and 
their conversions, ASCII code, Excess-3 code, Gray code, Complement representation of 
negative numbers: Signed Magnitude, One’s complement method, Two’s complement method, 
Binary Arithmetic. 
 
 
UNIT-II 8 Hrs 
Logic Simplification and Combinational Logic Design: Review of Boolean Algebra and De 
Morgan’s Theorem, SOP & POS forms, Canonical forms, Karnaugh maps up to 6 variables, 
Binary codes, Code Conversion. 
 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                          10 Hrs 
Combinational Logic Design: Analysis of combinational circuits, Design Procedure – Binary 
Adder, Subtractor, BCD Adder, multiplier, comparator, decoders, encoders, multiplexers, 
demultiplexers, Code Converters. 
 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           10 Hrs 
Sequential Circuits: Latches: RS latch and JK latch, Flip-flops: RS, JK, D, T flip flops, Master- 
slave flip flops, Edge-triggered flip-flops. Shift registers, Universal Shift register, ripple 
counters, synchronous counters, Ring counter, Johnson counter, Up-Down counter. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
VLSI Design flow: Design entry, Schematic, HDL, different modeling styles in VHDL, Data 
types and objects, Dataflow, Behavioural and Structural Modeling, Synthesis and Simulation 
VHDL constructs and codes for combinational and sequential circuits. 
 
 
  
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course the student will be able to 
1. Understand significance of number systems, conversions, binary codes. 
2. Apply different simplification methods for minimizing Boolean functions.  
3. Illustrate knowledge on design of various combinational circuits. 
4. Illustrate the concept of sequential logic design, analyze the operation of 
flip-flops, registers, and counters. 
5. Discuss the Use of HDL & appropriate EDA tools for digital logic design and 
simulation. 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. M. Morris Mano and Michael D. Ciletti, Digital Design, 4th Edition, Pearson Education, 
2013. 
2. D.V. Hall, “Digital Circuits and Systems”, Tata McGraw Hill, 1989 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Anand Kumar, Switching Theory and Logic Design, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2014. 
2. Charles Roth, “Digital System Design using VHDL”, Tata McGraw Hill 2nd edition 2012. 
3.  R.P. Jain, “Modern digital Electronics”, Tata McGraw Hill, 4th edition, 2009. 
TAUT2101                                HEALTH AND WELLNESS                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to help students to learn more about human health. This course helps 
to understand how current health knowledge helps to make future human beings even 
stronger and healthier. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To help understand the importance of a healthy lifestyle 
2. To familiarize students about physical and mental health 
3. To create awareness of various life style related diseases 
4. To understand the multiple dimensions of health and wellness, including physical, 
mental, emotional, social, and environmental aspects 
5. To Equip students with the knowledge and skills to develop, implement, and 
maintain healthy lifestyle practices 
 
UNIT-I            9 Hrs 
Define and differentiate health and wellness, Importance of health and wellness, Basic 
concepts of genetics, including genes, DNA, chromosomes, and inheritance patterns. 
Genetic factors affecting macronutrient (carbohydrates, proteins, and fats) digestion. Genetic 
variations associated with micronutrient (vitamins and minerals) digestion; malnutrition, 
under nutrition and over nutrition 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Brief overview of Body systems – Skeletal system, Muscular system, Circulatory System, 
Lymphatic system, Cardiovascular system, Respiratory system, Nervous system (Central 
nervous system, Peripheral nervous system, Somatic and Autonomic nervous systems), 
Digestive system, Urinary system, Endocrine system, Reproductive system, Integumentary 
system 
  
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Sedentary lifestyle and its risk of disease, Lifestyle Disease and its Management, Factors 
affecting mental health - Stress, anxiety, and depression, Identification of suicidal 
tendencies, Substance abuse (Drugs, Cigarette, Alcohol), de-addiction, counselling and 
rehabilitation. Four Vital signs- Pulse rate, Respiratory rate, Blood pressure, Body 
temperature, other measurements-Body mass index, Waist-Hip Ratio, Basal Metabolic Rate  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Risk factors and Pathology of the following Diseases and their Management –  - Diabetes - Hypertension - Coronary Heart Disease - Obesity - Osteoporosis 
  
- Osteoarthritis  - Rheumatoid-arthritis  - Cancers (Blood, Breast, Brain, Lung, Liver and Kidney) - Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) - Pain (including Low Back pain) 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Introduction to Functional Foods; Nutrients and Bioactive Compounds in Functional Foods; 
Functional Foods for Cardiovascular Health, Weight Management, Immune Function, 
Cognitive Health, Chronic Disease Prevention; Yoga and its importance in Health and 
Wellness 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon successful competition of the course the student would be able to -  
1. Understand the relationship between fitness and wellness  
2. Gain knowledge regarding various aspects and its practical implication for 
Wellbeing. 
3. Learn about behavior change theories and strategies for promoting healthy habits 
such as exercise, stress management, and nutrition 
4. Study techniques for setting realistic health goals, creating wellness plans, and 
overcoming barriers to maintaining a healthy lifestyle. 
5. Learn about the principles of a balanced diet, regular physical activity, mental health 
management, social relationships, and environmental factors that influence health 
 
Text Books: 
1. Physical Activity and Health by Claude Bouchard, Steven N. Blair, William L. 
Haskell. 
2. Mental Health Workbook by Emily Attached & Marzia Fernandez, 2021. 
3. Mental Health Workbook for Women: Exercises to Transform Negative Thoughts 
and Improve Wellbeing by Nashay Lorick, 2022. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Lifestyle Diseases: Lifestyle Disease Management, by C. Nyambichu & Jeff Lumiri, 
2018. 
2. Physical Activity and Mental Health by Angela Clow & Sarah Edmunds, 2013. 
 
  
TAUT2201                              COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT                L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides degree-seeking students with an array of opportunities to engage in an 
immersive community service-learning experience. It further helps to understand the 
resources, optimize the recourses in future days, and address the gaps in the communities. 
 
Course Objectives:  
Students undergoing this course are expected to:  
1. Understand community issues, needs, problems, strengths and recourses  
2. Demonstrate the ability to work with a diverse population   
3. Formulate more precise personal and professional life goals  
4. Demonstrate the ability to communicate effectively and collaborate with institutions 
and public  
5. Demonstrate the ability to take initiative, follow directions, lead, and solve problems  
UNIT-I Social Structure                                                                                        5 Hrs  
Concept of Society; Community; Association and Institution; Individual and Society; Social 
Groups- Meaning, Characteristics and Classification; Social Process; Social Change; 
Structure and Characteristics of urban, rural and tribal communities.  
UNIT-II Social Organization and Disorganization                                               5 Hrs  
Social Organization- meaning, elements and types; Voluntary Associations; Social System- 
definition, types and roles; Social Control- meaning, aims and process of social control; 
Social norms, morals and values; Social Disorganization- definition, causes, control and 
planning.  
UNIT-III Social Problems and Welfare State                                                            8 Hrs  
Social Problems- Poverty, Housing, food supply, illiteracy, Prostitution, dowry, child labor, 
child abuse, delinquency, crime, substance abuse, HIV/ AIDS, Covid-19; Venerable Group- 
elderly, handicapped, minority and another marginal group; Fundamental rights of 
individual, women and children, NITI Aayog, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, 
Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, and Role of Local Bodies for transformation; Corporate Social Responsibility; 
Social Work.  
Proposed Field activities: Field visit- Interaction with Local Self Government, Visit of 
Gram Panchayat & Staff, Socio-Economic Survey (5 hours/ one day). 
UNIT-IV Communication Strategies and Community Engagement                      18 Hrs  
Social Behavior Change Communication (SBCC); Focused Group Discussion; SWOT 
analysis; Participatory Learning Action.   
Proposed Field activities: Meeting, Mobilizing, Transect Walk, Identification of Natural 
Leaders, Timeline, Mapping, Case Study, Documentation; Outreach- Special Camp Viz., 
Health Education, Medical Camp, Environment Protection, Sustainability, Technology & 
Innovation, Nutrition, Swachh Bharat (15 Hours/ 4 days).  
 
UNIT-V Sustainable Development Goals 2023                                            9 Hrs  
Millennium Development Goals; Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 2030- 17 Goals; 
SDG Pyramid; Localizing SDGs; Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP).  
Proposed Field activities: Mapping the activities with SDG 2030 (6 Hours/ 1 day).  
  
Course Outcomes:   
By the end of the course, students should able to:  
1. Understand and apply the concept related to community and social structure.  
2. Develop the ability to involve and work with the social system.  
3. Understand various social problems emerging in society and solve them.  
4. Apply SBCC tools and SWOT analysis.   
5. Appreciate Sustainable Development Goals and contribute beyond SDG 2030.  
Text Books:  
1. Krishna Kant Singh & Ram Shankar Singh, (2011), Social Work and Community 
Development. 
2. Makara Rumley, (2020), Modern-Day Strategies for Community Engagement: How 
to Effectively Build Bridges Between People and the Bottom Line. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Hall, B. L., Tandon, R. & Tremblay, C. (2015). Strengthening Community University Research 
Partnerships: Global Perspectives.  
2. http://unescochaircbrsr.org/unesco/pdf/UNESCO%20Book%20Web_with%20BookCovers_
Aug202015_FINAL.pdf 
3. GUNi (Ed.). (2014). Knowledge, Engagement and Higher Education: Contributing to Social 
Change (Higher Education in the World 5). Hampshire (UK)/New York (USA): Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
4. UNESCO Chair in Community Based Research & Social Responsibility in Higher Education 
(2015). Institutionalizing Community University Research Partnerships: A User’s Manual.  
http://unescochair-cbrsr.org/unesco/pdf/CURP_Guidelines.pdf 
5. Vallaeys, F. (2014). University Social Responsibility: A Mature and Responsible Definition. In 
GUNi (Ed.), Knowledge, Engagement and Higher Education: Contributing to Social Change 
(Higher Education in the World 5) (pp. 88-96). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2202                              CLINICAL NUTRITION                                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3 0 0  3 
Course Description: 
Upon completion of the course, students will be prepared to apply their knowledge of 
clinical nutrition to promote health and manage diseases effectively, contributing to 
multidisciplinary healthcare teams. This course is essential for healthcare professionals, 
nutritionists, dietitians, and anyone interested in understanding the role of nutrition in 
clinical care and wellness promotion. 
 
Course Objectives:  
To enable the students to: 
1. Develop proficiency in conducting comprehensive nutritional assessments using 
various methods such as dietary recall, biochemical tests, and anthropometric 
measurements. 
2. Understand the impact of diet on the prevention, management, and progression of 
chronic diseases commonly encountered in clinical practice, including diabetes, 
cardiovascular diseases, and obesity. 
3. Acquire skills in designing individualized nutrition plans tailored to specific patient 
needs and health conditions across different life stages (e.g., pediatric, geriatric, 
maternal). 
4. Evaluate ethical issues related to nutritional counseling, respecting cultural dietary 
practices, and providing evidence-based dietary recommendations within clinical 
settings. 
5. Critically appraise current research and controversies in clinical nutrition, integrating 
evidence-based guidelines into decision-making processes to optimize patient 
outcomes. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs                                     
Introduction to nutrition - Food as source of nutrients, functions of food, definition of 
nutrition, nutrients & energy, adequate, optimum & good nutrition, malnutrition, Effect of 
cooking & heat processing on the nutritive value of foods, role of nutrition in prior 
pregnancy, during pregnancy, during lactation, in adolescence, Fitness, Athletics & Sports 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Food guide - Basic five food groups How to use food guide (according to R.D.A.)  
Interrelationship between nutrition & health: - Visible symptoms of good health, Use of 
food in body - Digestion, Absorption, transport & utilization, Role of fibres in human 
nutrition. malnutrition, Protein energy malnutrition.  
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Biomolecules as a nutrient: Carbohydrates: Functions, classification, food sources, storage 
in body. Fats & oils: composition, saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, classification, food 
sources, function of fats. Proteins - composition, sources, essential & non-essential amino 
acids, functions, Protein deficiency.  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Water minerals and Vitamins: Water - as a nutrient, function, sources, requirement, water 
balance & effect of deficiency.  Minerals - macro & micronutrients. - Functions, sources. 
Bioavailability and deficiency of Calcium, Iron, Iodine, Sodium & Potassium, Vitamins 
(water & fat soluble) - definition, classification & functions.  
 
  
UNIT-V                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Role of nutrients in disease management: Importance of nutrition in kidney and liver 
diseases with respect to their nutritional value. Case study- diabetes, cancer, Osteoporosis, 
Heart related diseases, role of Antioxidants as a nutrient in disease control. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, the student shall be able to  
1. Demonstrate proficiency in conducting thorough nutritional assessments using a variety of 
methods, interpreting results, and applying findings to develop dietary recommendations. 
2. Apply knowledge of macro and micronutrients, dietary supplements, and hydration to 
design effective nutrition plans for individuals with diverse health needs and conditions. 
3. Implement dietary interventions that contribute to the prevention, management, and 
improvement of chronic diseases, integrating nutritional strategies into comprehensive 
healthcare plans. 
4. Evaluate and address ethical considerations in nutritional counseling, respecting cultural 
diversity and individual preferences while adhering to professional standards and evidence
based practices. 
5. Critically analyze current research literature in clinical nutrition, utilizing evidence-based 
guidelines to make informed decisions and enhance patient outcomes in clinical settings. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Kathleen ML and Escott S. Krause's Food, Nutrition and Diet Therapy, 9thedn, W.B. 
Saunders Company Pennsylvania, 2000. 
2. Davidson S, Passmore R, Breck JFT. Human Nutrition and Dietetics, The English Language 
Book Society and Churchill Livingston, 1975. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Thomas B. Manual of Dietetic Practice. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, London, 
1988. 
2. Robinson CH. Normal and Therapeutic Nutrition. Oxford Publishing Co, Bombay, 1972. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2203      EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND MENTAL HEALTH  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course will explore the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health. 
Students will learn about the importance of emotional intelligence in promoting positive 
mental health, and will develop skills in recognizing and regulating emotions, managing 
stress, and building resilience. The course will cover topics such as emotional intelligence 
theories, emotional regulation strategies, mindfulness, self-compassion, and the impact of 
emotions on mental health. 
Course Objectives: 
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand the role of emotional intelligence in mental health 
2. Develop skills in recognizing and regulating emotions 
3. Understand the impact of stress on mental health and develop strategies for managing 
stress 
4. Understand the importance of self-compassion in promoting positive mental health 
5. Develop critical thinking and analytical skills in relation to emotional intelligence and 
mental health 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Introduction to Emotional Intelligence and Mental Health; Definition and history of 
emotional intelligence, the role of emotional intelligence in mental health, Professional 
organizations and ethical codes related to emotional intelligence 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Theoretical Perspectives on Emotional Intelligence; Ability model of emotional intelligence, 
Trait model of emotional intelligence, Mixed model of emotional intelligence, Mindfulness 
and Mental Health, Mindfulness and Mental Health. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Stress and Mental Health, Resilience and Mental Health; The impact of stress on mental 
health, Stress management techniques (e.g., relaxation techniques, time management, 
exercise) Definition and benefits of resilience, Factors that contribute to resilience, Building 
resilience in oneself and others. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Self-Compassion and Mental Health, Emotions and Relationships; Definition and benefits of 
self-compassion, Practice of self-compassion, Relationship between self-compassion and 
mental health, Emotions and Relationships 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Emotional Intelligence in the Workplace, Ethics and Emotional Intelligence; Emotional 
intelligence and job performance, the role of emotional intelligence in leadership, Emotional 
intelligence training in the workplace, Ethical issues related to emotional intelligence, 
Professional codes and standards related to emotional intelligence 
 
  
Final Project Presentations 
Students will present their final projects, which may include research papers, case studies, or 
other projects related to emotional intelligence and mental health. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Able to provide an overview of emotional intelligence and mental health 
2. Will understand the importance of emotional intelligence  
3. The impact of stress on mental health, Stress management techniques 
4. Relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health 
5. Understand the importance of Emotional Intelligence in the workplace.  
Text Books: 
1. Neff, K. (2011). Self-compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind. 
HarperCollins. 
2. Goleman, D. (2007). Emotional Intelligence (10th ed.). Bantam Books. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Covey, Stephen R., author. (2020). The 7 habits of highly effective people: powerful  
 lessons in personal change. New York :Simon & Schuster. 
2. Tolle, E. (2016). The power of now: A guide to spiritual enlightenment. Yellow Kite. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2204                                         HUMAN RIGHTS              L T P C                                                                                                                             
3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course offers a comprehensive introduction to the field of human rights, exploring the 
historical development, philosophical foundations, and contemporary issues surrounding the 
protection and promotion of human rights globally. Students will engage with key concepts, 
major international human rights instruments, and the roles of various actors in the human 
rights landscape.  
 
Course Objectives: 
This course is intended to prepare the students to  
1. Know Human Rights, its need importance, and kind of rights 
2. Understand the Human Rights of vulnerable groups 
3. Identify and analyze key international human rights documents and treaties. 
4. Know about the institutions enforcing the Human Rights 
5. Understand the violations of Human Rights and the safeguards available to citizens. 
UNIT-I Concept of Human Rights – Indian and International Perspectives        5 Hrs
  a. Evolution of Human Rights 
b. Definitions under Indian and International documents 
 
UNIT-II Broad classification of Human Rights and Relevant Constitutional Provisions.  
                 11 Hrs 
a. Right to Life, Liberty and Dignity  b. Right to Equality 
c. Right against Exploitation   d. Cultural and Educational Rights 
e. Economic Rights    f. Political Rights 
g. Social Rights 
 
UNIT-III Human Rights of Women and Children         11 Hrs 
a) Social Practice and Constitutional Safeguards 
b) Female Foeticide and Infantici 
c) Physical assault and harassment 
d) Domestic violence 
e) Conditions of Working Women 
 
UNIT-IV Institutions for Implementation             9 Hrs 
a. Human Rights Commission 
b. Judiciary 
 
UNIT-V Violations and Redressal              9 Hrs 
a. Violation by State 
b. Violation by Individuals 
c. nuclear weapons, bio war and terrorism 
d. Safeguards. 
 
  
Course Outcomes: 
 After the successful completion of this course the students will be able to  
1. Know about Human Rights, its need importance and kind of rights 
2. Understand the Human Rights of vulnerable groups 
3. Know about the institutions enforcing the Human Rights 
4. Understand the violations of Human Rights and the safeguards available to citizens. 
5. Develop critical thinking and analytical skills by examining case studies and current events. 
Text Books: 
1. Human Rights in India: Historical, Social and Political Perspectives (Law in India) Hardcover – Illustrated by Chiranjivi J. Nirmal (Author) 
2. History of Human Rights, Narrated by Andrea Giordani 
Reference Books: 
1. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights- UNO publication 
2. Making Sense of Human Rights- by James Nickel. 
3. The Idea of Natural Rights- by Brian Tierney. 
4. The Law of Peoples- by John Rawls. 
5. On Human Rights. - by James Griffin. 
6. Human Rights: Contemporary Issues by V.K. Ahuja 
7. Human Rights, M Girija, S Chand Edu tech Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2205                                             INDUSTRY 4.0                L T P C  
                                                                                                                          3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Industry 4.0 aims to the “smart” and connected production systems that are designed to 
sense, predict, and interact with the physical world, so as to make decisions that support 
production in real-time. In manufacturing, it can increase productivity, energy efficiency, 
and sustainability. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students: 
1. To impart basic idea in Industry 4.0.  
2. To provide students with good depth of knowledge of designing Industrial 4.0 Systems 
for various application.  
3. To learn the artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques/ tools in health 
care. 
4.  To understand the bigdata technology and its applications in health care. 
5. To learn the design and analysis of Industry 4.0 systems for healthcare applications. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Introduction: Introduction, Historical Context, General framework, Application areas, 
Dissemination of Industry 4.0 and the disciplines that contribute to its development, 
Artificial intelligence, The Internet of Things and Industrial Internet of Things, Additive 
manufacturing, Robotization and automation, Current situation of Industry 4.0.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Cyber Physical System: Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), Architecture of 
CPS- Components, Data science and technology for CPS, Emerging applications in CPS in 
different fields. Case study: Application of CPS in health care domain. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning: Artificial Intelligence: Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) – What & Why? History of AI- Foundations of AI, the AI Environment, Application 
Domains and Tools. 
Machine Learning- Introduction–Definition–Types of Machine Learning–Supervised, 
Unsupervised, Reinforcement Learning–Algorithms for Machine Learning–Problems solved 
by Machine Learning-Applications areas of Machine Learning in Health care. 
  
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs  
Big Data & Cloud Computing: What is Big Data, Evolution of Big Data, sources of Big 
Data? Characteristics of Big Data Vs – Big Data Myths- Data Discovery-Traditional 
Approach, Big Data Technology: Big Data Technology Process– Applications of Bigdata in 
Healthcare. 
Cloud Computing: Need– Definition – Types of Cloud-Types of Services– SaaS, PaaS, Iaas  
  
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9Hrs 
Impact of Industry 4.0 on Healthcare Industry: An introduction Discover how Industry 
4.0 is impacting and transforming the Healthcare Industry including self-diagnosis systems 
for patients, real-time diagnosis, 3D printed organs and Internet-of-Medical Things (IOMT).
  
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, student will be able to:  
1. Understand the basic concepts of Industry 4.0 and the other related fields 
2. Analyze, design and develop systems to solve the Engineering problems by integrating 
thermal, design and manufacturing Domains.  
3. Understand the various artificial intelligence and machine learning tools in health care 
domain.  
4. Apply bigdata technology in health care applications. 
5. Apply the learned Engineering knowledge for the Development of society and self. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Jean-Claude André, ―Industry 4.0, Wiley- ISTE, July 2019, ISBN: 781786304827, 2019. 
2. Diego Galar Pascual, Pasquale Daponte, Uday Kumar, ―Handbook of Industry 4.0 and SMART 
Systems, Taylor and Francis,2020  
 
Reference Books: 
1. P. Kaliraj, T. Devi, BigDataApplicationsinIndustry4.0, 2022, ISBN9781032008110, 
CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group 
2. P. Kaliraj, Devi Thirupathi, “Artificial Intelligence Theory, Models and Applications”, 
Auerbach Publications, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis group, 2021. 
3. Ethem Alpaydin, “Introduction to Machine Learning”, Third Edition, MIT Press, 
2014. 
4. P. Kaliraj, T. Devi, Industry 4.0 and Education: Transformative Technology and 
Applications, 2022, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TAUT2206                              MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The purpose of this course is to develop a student’s understanding and use of hospital and 
medical terminology. There is a focus on understanding the terns commonly used to identify 
the cause and effects of disease conditions. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the associate medical terms with specific body systems. 
2. To identify and interpret diagnostic and symptomatic terms related to the diseases specific to 
each body system. 
3. To describe designated diagnostic testing procedures (laboratory, x-ray, surgical, pharmacy, 
etc.). 
4. To Enable students to understand, use, and correctly pronounce a wide range of medical 
terms. 
5. To Prepare students to effectively communicate with healthcare professionals and patients 
using accurate medical terminology. 
 
UNIT-I                             9 Hrs 
Basics of medical terminology, Specialties in a Hospital, The Human body in health and 
disease 
 
UNIT-II                             9 Hrs 
The Skeletal System, The Muscular System, The lymphatic and immune systems 
 
UNIT-III                             9 Hrs 
The Respiratory System, The Circulatory System, The Digestive System, The Urinary 
System  
  
UNIT-IV                             9 Hrs 
The Nervous system, Special senses - Eyes and Ears, Skin - The Integumentary system 
 
UNIT-V                             9 Hrs 
The Endocrine system, The Reproductive System, Diagnostic procedures, Nuclear Medicine 
and Pharmacology 
 
Course Outcomes:  
Upon successful completion of the course student would be –  
1. Able to Identify and interpret complex medical terms by breaking them into their 
component word parts in order to decipher their meaning. 
2. Able to understand common diseases and disorders of the body systems 
3. Able to identify diagnostic tools and techniques for the common diseases and 
disorders of the human body  
4. Able to interpret medical records, lab reports, and other documentation to ensure clear 
and precise communication within healthcare teams and with patients 
5. Able to learn the roots, prefixes, and suffixes that form medical terms, as well as the 
terminology related to various body systems, diseases, procedures, and treatments. 
Students will be able to deconstruct complex terms into their component parts to 
understand their meanings. 
  
 
Text Books: 
1. Medical Terminology for Health Professions, 7th Edition by Ann Ehrlich; Carol L Schroeder, 
ISBN 13: 9781111543297, Published by Delmar Cengage Learning (2013) 
2. Workbook for Ehrlich/Schroeder's Medical Terminology for Health Professions, 7th by Carol 
Schroeder, Ann Ehrlich Published by Delmar Cengage Learning; 7th edition, 2012, ISBN-13  : 
 978-1111543280  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Quick and Easy Medical Terminology - With Access by Peggy C. Leonard, ISBN13: 978
0323595995, 9th Edition 
2. Medical Terminology Systems: A Body Systems Approach - With Access by Barbara A. Gylys, 
ISBN13: 978-0803658677, 8th Edition 
3. Understanding Medical Terminology by Agnes C. Frenay, ISBN13: 978-0697140586, 9th 
Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2207                                  SOCIAL NETWORK ANALYSIS                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
A thorough introduction to Social Network Analysis (SNA), an interdisciplinary topic that 
studies the connections and interactions between people, groups, and things in various social 
contexts, is provided in this course. Students will receive a broad understanding of the core 
ideas, approaches and uses of SNA in a variety of disciplines. The course will cover data 
gathering methods, network visualization, fundamental network metrics, sophisticated 
network ideas and practical SNA implementations. Students will learn the skills necessary to 
evaluate social networks and gain useful insights from intricate network data through hands
on exercises. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To introduce students to the foundational concepts and historical background of 
Social Network Analysis (SNA). 
2. To familiarize students with the basic building blocks of social networks, including 
nodes and edges and different types of social networks (e.g., online, offline, 
professional, friendship). 
3. To provide students with an understanding of key network measures such as degree 
centrality, betweenness centrality, clustering coefficients and network density. 
4. To demonstrate real-world applications of SNA, such as social network mining, 
influence and opinion dynamics, social network marketing and cybersecurity. 
5. To equip students with practical skills for analyzing and interpreting social network 
data. 
 
UNIT-I                             9 Hrs 
Overview of Social Network Analysis: Definition, history and key concepts. Nodes and 
Edges: Understanding the basic building blocks of social networks. Types of Social 
Networks: Exploring different types of social networks (e.g., online, offline, professional, 
friendship).Importance and Applications of SNA: How SNA is used in various fields (e.g., 
Engineering, Sociology, Psychology, Marketing and Business). 
 
UNIT-II                    9 Hrs 
Data Collection Methods: Techniques for gathering social network data (e.g., surveys, 
interviews, online platforms). Data Representation: Different formats for representing 
network data (e.g., adjacency matrix, edge list).Network Visualization: Introduction to 
visualization tools for nd interpreting network structures. 
 
UNIT-III                 9 Hrs 
Degree Centrality: Identifying influential nodes based on their connections. Betweenness 
Centrality: Understanding nodes that act as bridges in the network. Clustering Coefficients: 
Analyzing the degree of interconnectedness within local neighbourhoods. Network Density: 
Assessing the overall connectivity of a social network. 
 
UNIT-IV                 9 Hrs 
Small World Phenomenon: Exploring the "six degrees of separation" concept. Homophily 
and Social Influence: Understanding how social networks shape individuals' behaviour and 
beliefs. Network Resilience and Robustness: Examining the impact of node removal on the 
network's stability. Network Motifs: Identifying recurring patterns in complex social 
networks. 
  
UNIT-V                 9 Hrs 
Social Network Mining: Using SNA to extract meaningful patterns and insights from large
scale networks. Influence and Opinion Dynamics: Analyzing how information spreads 
through social networks. Social Network Marketing: Leveraging SNA for targeted 
marketing campaigns and product promotion. Online Social Networks and Cyber security: 
Understanding network-based threats and vulnerabilities. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Comprehend the foundational concepts, methodologies and tools of Social Network 
Analysis. 
2. Extract meaningful insights from social network data, identifying influential nodes and 
understanding network dynamics. 
3. Apply SNA concepts to real-world challenges in areas such as marketing, cyber security and 
social dynamics. 
4. Utilize SNA techniques to inform decision-making processes. 
5. Conduct and interpret SNA in various domains effectively. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications" by S. K. Garg, 2019, Wiley India. 
2. Introduction to Social Network Analysis: Concepts, Methods and Applications" by R. K. 
Singh, 2020, Springer India. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications" by Stanley Wasserman, Katherine 
Faust (1994, Cambridge University Press) 
2. Analyzing Social Networks" by Stephen P. Borgatti, Martin G. Everett, Jeffrey C. Johnson 
(2013, SAGE Publications) 
3. Networks, Crowds and Markets: Reasoning About a Highly Connected World" by David 
Easley, Jon Kleinberg (2010, Cambridge University Press). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2208  ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE & BIOMEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT   
L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3 0   0 3 
Course Description: 
This course covers antibiotics and drug resistance, including mechanisms and trends, and 
explores biomedical waste management, focusing on segregation, treatment, and disposal. 
Emphasis is placed on antimicrobial stewardship and modern technologies for handling 
biomedical waste and ensuring environmental safety. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand the history, mechanisms, and types of antibiotic resistance. 
2. Analyze trends in drug resistance and actions to combat it. 
3. Evaluate the consequences of antibiotic resistance and implement antimicrobial 
stewardship. 
4. Learn principles and practices of biomedical waste management and environmental safety. 
5. Utilize modern technologies and personal protective equipment for effective biomedical 
waste handling. 
 
UNIT-I                                                           9 Hrs 
Antibiotics: Antibiotic Resistance, History of antibiotics, How resistance happens and 
spreads, Types of resistance- intrinsic, acquired, passive.   
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Drug resistance - I: Trends in drug resistance, Actions to fight resistance, Bacterial 
persistence, Antibiotic sensitivity   
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Drug resistance - II: Consequences of antibiotic resistance, Antimicrobial Stewardship – 
Barriers and opportunities, tools and models in hospitals.    
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Biomedical waste management and environmental safety - I:  
Definition of Biomedical, Waste, Waste minimization, BMW – Segregation, collection, 
transportation, treatment and disposal (including colour coding).   
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Biomedical waste management and environmental safety - II:  
Liquid BMW, Radioactive waste, Metals / Chemicals / Drug waste, BMW Management & 
methods of disinfection, Modern Technology for Handling BMW, Use of Personal 
protective equipment (PPE), Monitoring & controlling cross-infection (Protective devices).   
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Explain antibiotic resistance, its history, and mechanisms. 
2. Analyse trends and strategies in drug resistance management. 
3. Assess the consequences of antibiotic resistance and implement antimicrobial stewardship. 
4. Understand principles and practices of biomedical waste management. 
5. Apply modern technologies and PPE for effective biomedical waste handling and infection 
control. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Antibiotics: Actions, Origins, Resistance" by Christopher Walsh 
2. "Antimicrobial Stewardship: Principles and Practice" by Matthew Laundy, Lynda A. Sisson, 
and Matthew Dryden. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Biomedical Waste Management in Hospitals: A Manual for Health Professionals" by 
Sushrut S. N. H.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2209                      BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION               L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to the fundamentals of behavioral theory, research and 
interventions in health education and promotion. The course will expose students to a wide 
range of theories, basic statistics and the use of open-source software in the analysis and 
evaluation of health aspects at the community level in a holistic manner. Furthermore, 
students will understand the concept of intersectoral and multidisciplinary coordination in 
order to improve data visualization in health education and promotion through the use of 
appropriate statistical tools. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the behavioral, social and cultural factors associated with health and illness. 
2. To explore factors that influence and barriers to practicing health behavior and changing 
poor health habits across age groups. 
3. To understand the structure of society, the role of society and various types of 
communication and identify the role of society, community, health education and 
communication in health. 
4. To describe the methods, models, tools and processes used in understanding health 
behavior change, health education and promotion. 
5. To apply relevant social and behavioral theories to diagnose and understand individual, 
social network, organizational, community and policymaker behaviors associated with the 
planning, implementation, evaluation and maintenance of community-based primary 
health care programs. 
 
UNIT-I                  5 Hrs 
Introduction to Social and Health Behavioral Health, Importance of social and behavioral 
factors in health, Historical perspectives on population and diseases.  
 
UNIT-II                 8 Hrs 
Health behavior: role of behavior factors in disease and disorders, Health behavior, health 
habits, Illness behavior, Practicing and changing health behavior, Barrier to modify poor 
health behavior, intervening with children, adolescents, adults and at risk, social 
determinants of Health, Changing health habits.  
 
UNIT-III               12 Hrs 
Basic concepts of society, community, and family, Society: features and types, Concept of 
culture: characteristics, elements, variability, social institutions: marriage and family. 
Working with communities, Community: Definition, concept of community participation, 
Benefits of community participation, Health communication, Communication: Definition, 
scope and requirements, Types of communication, Components of communication, 
Communication stages, Common communication approach, Methods of communication, 
Characteristics of effective communication, Barriers of effective communication. 
  
UNIT-IV               10 Hrs 
Health Behavior Models, Social Epidemiology, Health belief model, Theory of planned 
behavior, Transtheoretical Model and change process, Social network theory, Diffusion of 
innovation, Social reaction to diseases, Comparative health cultures, Health disparities. 
  
UNIT-V               10 Hrs 
Introduction Social network analysis, Basic of social network analysis, Introduction to open
source software and classification in health approaches, Introduction to Node XL software, 
Install, data visualize, data analysis and application among community level for policy
maker behaviors associated with the planning, implementation, evaluation, and maintenance 
of community-based health programs. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
End of the course completion student would be  
1. Understand behavioral, social and cultural factors associated with health and illness. 
2. Develop strategies to address barriers to practicing healthy behaviors and changing poor 
health habits across age groups. 
3. Analyze the structure of society and various types of communication and identify the role 
of society, community, health education and communication in health. 
4. Apply appropriate methods, models, tools and processes for understanding health behavior 
change, health education and promotion. 
5. Utilize SNA tools, strategies and social and behavioral theories to diagnose and understand 
individual, social network, organizational, community and policymaker behaviors in 
community-based primary health care programs. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Essentials of health behavior: Social and behavioral theory in public health by 
Mark Edberg ( Jones and Bartlett publishers 
2. Mahajan BK. Methods in Bio-statistics. Jaypee Brothers, Medical Publishers (p) Ltd., G16, 
EMCA House, 23/23B, Ansari Road, Daryaganj, Post Box: 7193, New Delhi 110 002, India, 
1991. List Current Essential Reference 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Foster and Anderson: Medical Anthropology, Wiley, New York 
2. Anderson & Taylor, Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society. 
3. Neubeck and Glasberg, Selected Material from Sociology: Diversity, Conflict, and 
Change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2201A                               DISABILITY MANAGEMENT                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
Disability Management course is designed to provide students with an in-depth 
understanding of the strategies, practices, and policies essential for supporting individuals 
with disabilities in various settings. This course covers the principles and techniques of 
disability management, focusing on creating inclusive environments in the workplace, 
educational institutions, and the community.     
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the social, medical, and legal aspects of disability. 
2. Evaluate the impact of disability on individuals and society. 
3. Analyze policies and regulations related to disability management. 
4. Develop strategies for supporting individuals with disabilities in various contexts. 
5. Promote inclusivity and diversity in the workplace and community. 
UNIT-I Introduction to Disability Management                                                          9 Hrs 
Definition and classification of disabilities, Historical perspectives on disability, Disability 
as a social construct, Medical aspects of Disability, Common medical conditions leading to 
disability, Assessing functional limitations and impairments 
UNIT- II Social and Psychological Aspects of Disability                                             9 Hrs 
The impact of disability on quality of life, Stigma and discrimination, Coping and 
psychological adjustment to disability, Role of healthcare professionals in disability 
management, Psychological Interventions and Chronic Health Disorders; Therapies, 
Pharmacological Interventions, Individual Therapy, Relaxation, Stress Management and 
exercise, Social Support Interventions, Help on the Internet, Support Groups  
UNIT- III Legal and Ethical Framework                                                                     9 Hrs 
Disability rights and legislation, Equal opportunity and anti-discrimination laws, Ethical 
considerations in disability management, Emerging technologies and their impact on 
disability management, the future of disability policy and practice 
UNIT- IV Workplace Disability Management                                                             9 Hrs 
Reasonable accommodation and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Return-to
work programs Workplace diversity and inclusion, Current Issues  
UNIT- V Community and Public Health Approach                                                    9 Hrs 
Community resources and services for individuals with disabilities, Accessibility and 
universal design Disability awareness and advocacy, Analysis of real-life cases in disability 
management, Developing disability management plans, Accommodation strategies and their 
implementation, Current Issues and Future Trends 
  
Course Outcomes:  
By the end of the course, the students would be able to; 
1. Understand various aspects and causes of disability. 
2. Get insight on the efficacy of interventions and therapies to deal disability.  
3. Assess the ethical and legal consideration of disability. 
4. Acknowledge the importance of ADA act and it implementation in workplace. 
5. Know and participate in various community-based disability programs. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Preventing chronic disease: a vital investment. WHO global report. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2005 (http://www.who.int/chp/chronic_disease_ report/en, accessed 15 
May 2008).  
2. Singh D. Transforming chronic care: evidence about improving care for people with long
term conditions. Birmingham, University of Birmingham, 2005.  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Chronic diseases [web site]. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 
(http://www.who.int/topics/chronic_disease/en, accessed 15 May 2008). 
2. National Center for Health Statistics definitions: health condition [web site]. Atlanta, United 
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2201B                                     DISASTER MANAGEMENT                      L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3  0  0  3 
Course Description: 
The Disaster Management course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive 
understanding of the principles, strategies, and practices essential for effectively managing 
disasters. This course explores the various types of natural and human-made disasters, their 
causes, impacts, and the processes involved in mitigating, preparing for, responding to, and 
recovering from such events. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The main objectives of this course are to: 
1. To impart knowledge and concepts of disaster, disaster management and 
disaster risk reduction. 
2. To enhance the students understanding on Hazard Vulnerability and Risk Analysis 
3. To develop positive attitude towards practical response to different stages of 
disaster  
4. To management by adopting advance technology and sustainable development. 
5. To ensure disaster response skills in assessment, analysis, intervention and 
evaluation in the Practice of reducing disaster risk. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Concepts of Disaster and Vulnerability                                                                                          - Hazards and disasters - Concepts, vulnerability and risks - Hazard and disaster type- Natural, Water-related, Pandemic and Human induced 
hazards and disasters - Causes and impacts of disasters- Impact on natural eco-system; physical, 
psychological and social impact - Disaster and financial resilience - GIS and Remote Sensing 
Disaster vulnerability profile of India - Specific to geographical regions and states 
(as per regional significance). 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Disasters Intervention Practices - Disaster Management Cycle-Rescue, relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction, 
prevention, mitigation and preparedness - Disaster risk reduction (ORR) - community based ORR, Institutions concerned with 
safety, Disaster mitigation and construction techniques as per Indian Standard - Early warning systems - Trauma and Stress management - First-aid and emergency procedures 
Awareness generation strategies for the community on safe practices in disaster (as 
per regional significance) 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Disaster Management 
Components of disasters management - Preparedness of rescue & relief, mitigation, 
rehabilitation & reconstruction,  Institutional framework of disaster management in India 
(NDMA-SDMA-DDMA, NDRF, Civic volunteers, NIDM), Phases of disasters/risk 
management and post-disaster responses Compensation and insurance 
 
 
 
UNIT- IV                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Applications of remote sensing & GIS in disaster management - Capacity building for disaster/damage mitigation (structural and non-structural 
measures). - Disaster risk reduction strategies and National Disaster Management Guidelines - Disaster Management Act-2005 - Regional issues as per regional requirement/ university can take minimum two topics 
as per High Powered Committee. 
 
UNIT- V                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Practical exposure requirements: Field work/ community visit and Vulnerability Mapping, 
Safe community planning and implementation, Mock Drill/ Regional issues as per 
region/university 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to: 
1. Define and analysis factors contributing to disasters, threats to development, life and 
nature 
2. Demonstrate, and practice disaster risk reduction activities towards sustainable 
development 
3. Formulate, organize and assess disaster risk reduction  
4. Plan activities according to the nature of disasters and factors of vulnerabilities 
5. Able to mitigate disaster and educate communities 
 
Mode of Evaluation: Continuous Assessment Test, Quizzes, Assignments, Multiple choice 
questions test, field work report, project report. 
 
Text Books: 
1. “Disaster Management” by Harsh K. Gupta 
2. “Disaster Management: Future Challenges and Opportunities” by Jagbir Singh 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Singh, R. (2017), "Disaster Management Guidelines for Earthquakes, Landslides, 
Avalanches and Tsunami". Horizon Press Publications 
2. Taimpo (2016), "Disaster Management and Preparedness" CRC Press Publications 
3. Nidhi, G.D. (2014), "Disaster Management Preparedness". CBS Publications Pvt. 
Ltd. 
4. Gupta, A. K., Nair, S.S., Shiraz, A. and Dey, S.(2013), "Flood Disaster Risk 
Management- CBS Publications Pvt. Ltd. 
5. Singh, R. (2016), "Disaster Management Guidelines for Natural Disasters" 
Oxford University Press Pvt. Ltd. 
 
  
TAUT2201C                    HUMAN VALUES & PROFESSIONAL ETHICS       L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Human Values and Professional Ethics course aims to explore the fundamental 
principles that underpin ethical behavior and moral reasoning. This course provides students 
with an understanding of core human values and ethical frameworks, fostering the 
development of personal integrity, social responsibility, and professional ethics. Through 
this course, students will engage with key philosophical theories, contemporary ethical 
issues, and the application of ethical principles in various contexts. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the need, guidelines, content, and process for Value Education. 
2.  Understand the concept of harmony within oneself. 
3. Understand the values in human relationships. 
4. Understand the interconnectedness and mutual fulfillment among the four orders of 
nature. 
5. Understand the implications of a holistic understanding of harmony on professional 
ethics. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Introduction – Need, guidelines, content and process for Value Education Value 
Education  
• Understanding the need, basic guidelines, content and process for Value Education 
• Self-exploration what is it? Its content and process; “Natural acceptance” and 
Experiential Validation as the mechanism for self-exploration. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Understanding harmony in the human being- Harmony in myself! 
• Understanding human being as a coexistence of the sentient I and the material body 
• Understanding the harmony of I with the body: Sanyam and Swasthya; correct 
appraisal of physical needs, meaning of prosperity in detail. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Understanding harmony in the Family and Society- Harmony in Human relationship 
• Understanding values in human – 
• Human relationship; meaning of Nyaya and program for its fulfillment to ensure 
Ubhay- trupti; Trust (Vishwas) and Respect (Samman) as the foundational values of 
relationship 
• Visualizing a universal harmonious order in society-Undivided Society (Akhand 
Samaj), Universal Order (Sarvabhaum Vyawastha) from family to world family. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Understanding Harmony in Nature; Coexistence 
• Interconnectedness and mutual fulfillment among the four orders of nature- 
recyclability and self-regulation in nature. 
• Holistic perception of harmony at all levels of existence. 
 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Implications of the above Holistic understanding of harmony on professional ethics 
Definitiveness of Ethical Human Conduct 
Basis for Humanistic Education, Humanistic Constitution and Humanistic Universal 
Order Competence in professional ethics 
Ability to utilize the professional competence for augmenting universal human order 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of this course, the learners will be able to:  
1. Students will be able to explain the need, guidelines, content, and process for Value 
Education. 
2. Students will demonstrate an understanding of the harmony within oneself, 
identifying the sentient self and the material body. 
3. They will be capable of visualizing and explaining the concept of a universal 
harmonious order from the family level to the global level. 
4. They will recognize and explain the importance of recyclability and self-regulation 
in nature, and develop a holistic view of harmony at all levels of existence. 
5. They will be able to define and advocate for ethical human conduct in their 
professional lives. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Value Education and Professional Ethics"** by R.S. Naagarazan 
2. "Human Values and Professional Ethics"** by Rishabh Anand 
 Reference Books: 
1. Mind and Body: Holistic Approach"by Dr. V.K. Sharma 
2. "Integrative Body-Mind Training"** by Yi-Yuan Tang 
3. Understanding Harmony in the Family and Society 
4. "Human Values and Professional Ethics"** by Jayashree Suresh 
5. "Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research"** by Caroline Whitbeck 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT2201D              
INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL    
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
This course covers infection control principles, antibiotic resistance, and antimicrobial 
stewardship. Students will learn about sterilization, disinfection, hand hygiene, PPE, and 
managing drug resistance in healthcare settings. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand evidence-based infection control practices. 
2. Learn prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections. 
3. Analyse the history and mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. 
4. Examine trends and actions to combat drug resistance. 
5. Implement antimicrobial stewardship in hospitals. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                              
9 Hrs  
Evidence-based infection control principles and practices: Sterilization, Disinfection, 
Effective hand hygiene, Use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                            
9 Hrs  
Infection control: Prevention & control of common healthcare-associated infections, 
Components of an effective infection control program, Guidelines (NABH and JCI) for 
Hospital Infection Control. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           
1. "Antimicrobial Stewardship: Principles and Practice" by Matthew Laundy, Lynda A. Sisson, 
and Matthew Dryden 
9 Hrs               
Antibiotics: Antibiotic Resistance, History of antibiotics, How resistance happens and 
spreads, Types of resistance- intrinsic, acquired, passive.   
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           
9 Hrs 
Drug resistance: Trends in drug resistance, Actions to fight resistance, Bacterial 
persistence, Antibiotic sensitivity.   
UNIT-V                                                                                                                             
Consequences of antibiotic resistance, Antimicrobial Stewardship – Barriers and 
opportunities, tools and models in hospitals   
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Apply effective infection control practices. 
2. Prevent and manage healthcare-associated infections. 
3. Explain the history and spread of antibiotic resistance. 
4. Identify and combat drug resistance trends. 
5. Implement antimicrobial stewardship strategies. 
Text Books: 
9 Hrs 
1. "Infection Prevention and Control: Theory and Practice for Healthcare Professionals" by 
Debbie Weston 
2. "Antibiotics: Actions, Origins, Resistance" by Christopher Walsh 
Reference Books: 
TAUT2201E                            NSS & YOUTH DEVELOPMENT   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
The National Service Scheme (NSS) aims to develop students' personalities through 
community service and national integration. It encourages students to work towards societal 
development, fostering a sense of responsibility and civic duty. The program bridges 
academic learning and real-life experiences, promoting overall personal growth and social 
awareness among youth. 
Course Objectives:  
1. To explain the nature, functions and importance of NSS.  
2. To explain the role of NSS in the context of youth, community and voluntary 
service.  
3. To develop the necessary communication and soft skills.  
4. To appreciate the importance of health, hygiene and sanitation for a healthy nation.  
5. To develop the concept and skills of managing environment issues and disaster 
management.  
UNIT-I                              9 Hrs 
Youth Development Program in India and Role of Youth Leaders National Youth Policy; 
Youth Development Program at National Level, State Level, Volunteer Level; Youth centric 
and youth led organizations Role and Importance of youth leadership, Leadership capability 
and its development. 
 
     UNIT-II                 9 Hrs 
Meaning type of leader, Qualities, Traits, Role, Importance of a Good Leader Social, 
psychologic factors affecting the youth. 
Life Skills-Self-awareness, Empathy, Effective Communication, Decision Making; Role of 
Music and Art in Youth Development. 
 
    UNIT-III                 9 Hrs  
Basic Features of the Indian Constitution consumer protection act right to Information; 
Child Protection Act, Problems of Aging: Problems Protection of Interests. 
 
    UNIT-IV                  9 Hrs 
Side effects of modern lifestyle and their countermeasures Diet, exercise, sleep in Indian 
lifestyle; Collection, Utilization and Camp; Management of Camps; Biography of Swami 
Vivekananda. 
 
    UNIT-V                            9 Hrs 
Field Work - Rural visit- campaign- rally- Competitions. 
  
 
  Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of this course, the learners will be able to:  
1. Explain the role and functions of NSS.  
2. Appraise the role of NSS volunteers in developing the society as a whole.  
3. Develop the necessary skills of effective communication, leadership and healthy 
living.  
4. Develop the necessary skills to mitigate disasters and other environmental 
challenges.  
5. Develop consciousness about personal health and hygiene.  
Text Books: 
1. Communication Skills by N Rao & R P Das (HPH)  
2. Biodiversity, Environment & Disaster Management by Shamna Hussain (Unique 
Publishers) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. NSS Manual published by the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, Govt. of India  
2. National Youth Policy Document  
3. National Service Scheme - A Youth Volunteers Programme For Under Graduate 
Students as Per UGC Guidelines by J D S Panwar, A K Jain & B K Rathi (Astral)  
4. Environmental Studies by P K Pandey (Mahaveer Publications) 
 
  
BTST2303                                       CONSTITUTION OF INDIA                       L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3 0 0   3 
Course Description: 
The Constitution of India course provides a comprehensive understanding of the 
fundamental principles, structure, and functioning of the Indian Constitution. This course 
examines the historical evolution, key features, and various interpretations of the 
Constitution, highlighting its significance in shaping India's legal and political landscape. 
Through this course, students will gain insights into the roles and responsibilities of different 
branches of government, fundamental rights and duties of citizens, and the constitutional 
mechanisms that ensure the democratic functioning of the nation. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1 To realize the significance of constitution of India to students from all walks of life 
and help them to understand the basic concepts of Indian constitution. 
2 To identify the importance of fundamental rights as well as fundamental duties. 
3 To understand the functioning of Union, State and Local Governments in Indian 
federal system. 
4 To learn procedure and effects of emergency, composition and activities of election 
commission and amendment procedure. 
5 To acquire knowledge to appear for competitive examinations. 
 
UNIT-I                                       9 Hrs 
Historical Background – Constituent Assembly of India – Philosophical Foundations of The 
Indian Constitution – Preamble – Constitutional amendments 
 
UNIT-II                                                9 Hrs
  
Fundamental Rights – Directive Principles of State Policy – Fundamental Duties – 
Citizenship – Constitutional Remedies for Citizens;  
 
UNIT-III                            9 Hrs 
Union Government – Structures of the Union Government and Functions – President – Vice 
President – Prime Minister – Cabinet – Parliament – Supreme Court of India – Judicial 
Review. 
 
UNIT-IV                            9 Hrs 
State Government – Structure and Functions – Governor – Chief Minister – Cabinet – State 
Legislature – Judicial System in States – High Courts and other Subordinate Courts. 
 
UNIT-V                                       9 Hrs 
Statutory Institutions -Elections-Election Commission of India, National Human Rights 
Commission, National Commission for Women; Local Self Government; Lok pal. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course the student should be able to: 
1. Understand and explain the significance of Indian Constitution as the fundamental law of the 
land. 
2. Exercise his fundamental rights in proper sense at the same time identifies his responsibilities in 
national building. 
3. Analyze the Indian political system, the powers and functions of the Union, State and Local 
Governments in detail 
4. Understand Electoral Process, Emergency provisions and Amendment procedure. 
5. Take part in competitive examinations with confidence. 
 
Text Books: 
1 Durga Das Basu, “Introduction to the Constitution of India “, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi. 
2 R.C.Agarwal, (1997) “Indian Political System”, S.Chand and Company, New Delhi. 
 
Reference Books: 
1 Sharma, Brij Kishore, “Introduction to the Constitution of India”, Prentice Hall of India, New 
Delhi. 
2 The Constitution of India (2022) : 
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s380537a945c7aaa788ccfcdf1b99b5d8f/uploads/2023/05/20230
50195.pdf  
3 Refer the website through the link given for Constitution of India in various Indian Languages 
https://legislative.gov.in/constitution-of-india/  
4 Indian Constitution at Work by National Council of Educational Research and Training, Sri 
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
  
BTSL2302: Java Programming Lab L   T   P   C  
  0   0  2    1  
Prerequisite: Programming for Problem Solving 
Course Description: 
The course introduces object-oriented programming (OOP) in the Lab. In this course the 
students learn object-oriented concepts through Java. This lab is devoted for students to 
work on practical experiments, projects and research work related to courses such as 
object-oriented programming and JAVA. This lab also enhances the programming skills 
through practical assignments and case-studies. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Learn to use object orientation to solve problems and use java language to 
implement them. 
2. To experiment with the syntax and semantics of java language and gain experience 
SSwith java programming. 
3. Illustrate inheritance concepts for reusing the program. 
4. Design and develop Java program using Lambda Expression. 
5. Understand and establish JDBC connection for Database Application 
 
 
LIST OF EXPERIMENTS: 
 
 
1) Preparing and practice–Installation of  Java  software,  study  of  any  
Integrated development environment, sample programs on operator precedence 
and associativity, class and package concept, scope concept, control structures, 
constructors and destructors. Learn to compile, debug and execute java 
programs. 
 
 
2) a) Write Java program(s) to display n prime numbers. b)  Write Java program(s) to 
multiply two matrices. 
 
 
3)a) Write a Java program to create a student class with following fields 
i. Hall ticket number 
ii. Student Name 
iii. Department Create ‘n’ number of Student objects where ‘n’ value is passed as input to 
constructor. 
b) Write a Java program to demonstrate String comparison using == and equals method. 
 
 
4) Write a program in JAVA to demonstrate the method and constructor 
overloading. 
 
 
5) a) Demonstrate the implementation of inheritance (multilevel, hierarchical and 
multiple) by using extend and implement keywords. 
b) Write a java program to implement the concept of dynamic method dispatch. 
  
 
 
6) a) Write a java program to implement stack concept using interface. 
b)  Write a java program to demonstrate the concept of Packages and Access protection in 
packages. 
7.  a) Write a java program to create a user defined exception that displays an error message 
when user enters an integer value greater than n. 
b) Write a Java program that creates three threads. First thread displays ―Good 
Morning‖ every one second, the second thread displays ―Hello‖ every two seconds 
and the third thread displays ―Welcome‖ every three seconds. 
8) a) Write a java program to list the number of characters, lines and words in a text file to 
another text file. 
b) Develop a Java Program to illustrate the concept of List using Java Collections c) 
Develop a Java Program to illustrate the concept of Map using Java Collections 
 
 
9)  a) Develop a Java Program to implement comparator using lambda expressions. 
b) Develop a Java program using built-in functional interface (use one of the interface - Consumer, Supplier or Predicate). 
c) Develop a Java program to implement various operations using Stream API. 
d) Develop a Java program to implement simple pattern matching using regex package 
 
 
10) Develop a Java application to establish a JDBC connection, create a table student with 
properties name, register number, mark1, mark2, mark3. Insert the values into the table by 
using java and display the information of the students. 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of this course the student be able to: 
1. Solve the problem using object-oriented approach and design solutions which are 
robust. 
2. Develop portable programs which work in all environments using classes and 
objects. 
3. Write the programs illustrating inheritance concept. 
4. Create user defined exceptions and user-friendly interfaces. 
5. Apply Collection Framework, lambda expressions and Stream API for application 
development. 
  
 
Text Books: 
1.” Java the Complete Reference”, Herbert Schildt, MCGRAW HILL Education, 9th 
Edition,2016. 
2. “Understanding Object – Oriented Programming with Java”, T. Budd, updated edition, 
Pearson Education, 2000. 
Reference Books: 
1. “Programming with Java” T.V.Suresh Kumar, B.Eswara Reddy, P.Raghavan Pearson 
Edition. 
2. “Object Oriented Programming through Java”, P. Radha Krishna, 1st edition, Universities 
Press, 2007. 
3.   Core Java, Volume 1-Fundamentals, eighth edition, Cay S.Horstmann and Gary Cornell, 
Pearson education. 
4. “An Introduction to programming and OO Design using Java”, updated edition, Pearson 
        Education, 2000
BTSL2801: Digital Logic design Lab L  T  P  C 
0   0  2   1 
 
Prerequisite: Basic Electronics 
Course Description: 
The digital system design laboratory introduces the hardware description language for the 
design and development of digital integrated circuits and field programmable devices. It 
provides VHDL language elements, synthesizable register transfer logic models in structural, 
dataflow, behavioral modeling of combinational and sequential circuits. This laboratory 
includes basic building block for the applications to VLSI chips. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
1. Understand the pin configuration of various logic gates ICs  
2. Realization of Demorgan’s theorem, SOP and POS forms. 
3. Analyze the functionality of Adders, Subtractors, code converters and vice versa  
4. Verify the functionality of Multiplexers, Demultiplexers, Decoders and Encoders. 
5. Verify the functionality of Flip-flops, Counters and Shift registers. 
 
LIST OF EXPERIMENTS (Hardware) 
1. Realization of Boolean Expressions using Gates 
2. Design and realization of logic gates using universal gates 
3. Design and realization of a 4 – bit Gray to Binary and Binary to Gray Converter 
4. Verify the functionality of Mux and De-Mux ICs 
5. Verify the functionality of Encoder and Decoder ICs 
6. Design and realization of 4-bit comparator 
7. Verify the functionality of D & T Flip-Flop ICs 
8. Verify the functionality of S-R & J-K Flip-Flop ICs 
9. Mod-N counter using 7490 and 74190. 
10. Shift register IC 7495. 
 
 
LIST OF EXPERIMENTS (Hardware) 
VHDL Programming: 
1. Write structural and dataflow VHDL models for 
a) Half adder / Half subtractor b) Full adder / Full subtractor 
2. Write a VHDL program in structural model for 
a) 16:1 mux realization b) 3:8 decoder realization through 2:4 decoder 
3. Write a VHDL program in behavioural model for 
a) 3:8 decoder b) 8:3 encoder 
4. Write a VHDL program in structural and behavioural models for 8 bit asynchronous up- 
down counter 
5. Write a VHDL program in structural model for 8-bit Universal Shift Register. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course students will have the ability to  
1. Construct Basic combinational Circuits and Verification of its functionality  
2. Construct Sequential Circuits and Verification of its functionality  
3. Design, test and evaluate various combinational circuits such as adders, subtractors, 
multiplexers, demultiplexers, decoders etc. 
4. Simulate various combinational circuits using VHDL   
5. Simulate sequential circuits flip-flops, counters etc. using VHDL. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV SEMESTER 
BTST2702: Discrete Mathematics and Graph Theory L  T  P  C 
3   1   0   4 
 
Prerequisite: Basic Mathematics 
Course Description: 
 
The purpose of this course is to understand and use (abstract) discrete structures that are 
backbones of computer science. Introduce the concepts of mathematical logic and gain 
knowledge in sets, relations and functions and Solve problems using counting techniques and 
combinatorics and to introduce generating functions and recurrence relations. Use Graph 
Theory for solving real world problems. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
1. To explain about the Algebra, Graph theory and Recurrence relations. 
 
2. To demonstrate the application of basic methods of discrete mathematics in Computer 
Science problem solving. 
 
3. To elucidate solving mathematical problems from algorithmic perspective. 
 
4. To introduce the mathematical concepts which will be useful to study advanced courses 
Design and Analysis of Algorithms, Theory of Computation, Cryptography and Software 
Engineering etc. 
 
5. To reveal how solutions of graph theory can be applied to computer science problems 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                           12 Hrs 
 
Mathematical Logic: 
Introduction, Statements and Notation, Connectives, Well-formed formulas, Tautology, 
Duality law, Equivalence, Implication, Normal Forms, functionally complete set of 
connectives, Inference Theory of Statement Calculus, Predicate Calculus, Inference theory of 
Predicate Calculus. 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                          12 Hrs 
 
Set Theory: 
 
Basic Concepts of Set Theory, Relations and Ordering, Functions composition of 
functions, Inverse Functions, Lattices and its properties. Algebraic structures: Algebraic 
Systems-Examples and General Properties, Semi groups and Monoids, groups, sub groups, 
homomorphism, Isomorphism. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                         12 Hrs 
 
 
Elementary Combinatorics: 
 
Basics of Counting, Combinations and Permutations, Enumeration of Combinations and 
Permutations, Enumerating Combinations and Permutations with Repetitions, 
Enumerating Permutations with Constrained Repetitions, Binomial Coefficients, The 
Binomial and Multinomial Theorems, The Principle of Inclusion-Exclusion. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           12 Hrs 
 
Recurrence Relations: 
 
Generating Functions of Sequences, Calculating Coefficients of Generating Functions, 
Recurrence relations, Solving Recurrence Relations by Substitution and Generating functions, 
The Method of Characteristic roots, Solutions of Inhomogeneous Recurrence Relations. 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                            12 Hrs 
 
Graphs: 
 
Basic Concepts, Isomorphism and Subgraphs, Trees and their Properties, Spanning Trees, 
Directed Trees, Binary Trees, Planar Graphs, Euler’s Formula, Multigraphs and Euler Circuits, 
Hamiltonian Graphs, Chromatic Numbers, The Four-Color Problem 
Course Outcomes: 
 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
 
1. Apply mathematical logic to solve roblems. 
 
2. Understand the concepts and perform the operations related to sets, relations and 
functions, gain the conceptual background needed and identify structures of algebraic 
nature. 
3. Apply basic counting techniques to solve combinatorial problems. 
 
4. Problems and solve recurrence relations. 
 
5. Apply Graph Theory in solving computer science problems. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Joe L. Mott. Abraham Kandel and Theodore P. Baker, “Discrete Mathematics 
for Computer Scientists & Mathematicians”, 2nd Edition, Pearson, 2008. (For Units 
III to V). 
2. J P Trembly and R Manohar, “Discrete Mathematical Structures with Applications 
to Computer Science”, 1st Edition, McGraw Hill, 2017(For Unit I&II). 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Ralph   P.   Grimaldi   and   B.V.   Ramana,   “Discrete   and   Combinatorial 
Mathematics, an Applied Introduction”, 5th Edition, Pearson, 2016. 
 
2. Narsingh Deo, “Graph Theory with Applications to Engineering”, Prentice Hall, 
1979. 
 
3. D.S. Malik and M.K. Sen, “Discrete Mathematics theory and Applications”, Ist Edition, 
Cengage Learning, 2012. 
 
4. C L Liu and D P Mohapatra, “Elements of Discrete Mathematics, A computer Oriented 
approach”, 4th Edition, MCGRAW-HILL, 2018. 
BTST2901 Management for Engineers L  T  P  C 
3   0   0   3 
Prerequisite: NIL 
Course Description: This course is intended to help the students to learn the basic concepts 
and functions of management and its role in the performance of an organization and to 
understand various decision-making approaches available for managers to achieve 
excellence. Learners shall have a broad view of different functional areas of management 
like operations, human resource, finance and marketing. 
Course Objectives: 
 
1.   Introducing fundamental concepts of  management  that  helps  student  understand 
intricacies of management world around us. 
2.   Introducing management aspects of nature starting from the basics and critical concepts 
of different nature, 
3.   Introducing decision making and functional areas of management 
4.   Introducing various aspects related to management 
5.   Introducing various aspects related to entrepreneurship 
 
UNIT I Introduction to management Theory                                                               12 Hrs 
Introduction to management theory, Management Defined, Characteristic of Management, 
Management as an art-profession, System approaches to Management, Task and 
Responsibilities of a professional Manager, Levels of Manager and Skill required. 
UNIT II Management and Organization                                                                       12 Hrs 
Management Process, Planning types, Mission, Goals, Strategy, Programmes, Procedures, 
Organizing, Principles of Organization, Delegation, Span of Control, Organization Structures, 
Directing, Leadership, Motivation, Controlling. 
UNIT III   Productivity and decision making                                                              12 Hrs 
Concept of productivity and its measurement; Competitiveness; Decision making process; 
decision making under certainty, risk and uncertainty; Decision trees; Models of decision 
making 
UNIT IV Functional areas of management                                                                  12 Hrs 
 
Introduction to functional areas of management, Operations management, Human resources 
management, Marketing management, financial management. 
UNIT V Entrepreneurship                                                                                             12 Hrs 
Introduction to entrepreneurship - Entrepreneurship in India, Role of Government, 
Business plans, Corporate social responsibility, Patents and Intellectual property rights. 
  
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Basic knowledge of management aspects. 
2.   Understanding of organizations. 
3.   Understanding of the productivity and decision-making concepts. 
4.   Understanding entrepreneurship. 
5.   Understand the entrepreneurship. 
 
Text Books: 
1. H. Koontz, and H. Weihrich, Essentials of Management: An International Perspective. 8th 
ed., McGraw-Hill, 2009. 
2. Robbins, S. P., Judge, T., Vohra, N. (2013). Organizational Behavior. India: Pearson. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. P. Kotler, K. L. Keller, A. Koshy, and M. Jha, Marketing Management: A South Asian 
Perspective. 14th ed., Pearson, 2012. 
2. M. Y. Khan, and P. K. Jain, Financial Management, Tata-McGraw Hill, 2008. 
3. R. D. Hisrich, and M. P. Peters, Entrepreneurship: Strategy, Developing, and Managing a 
New Enterprise, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill Education, 1997. 
4. D. J. Sumanth, Productivity Engineering and Management, McGraw-Hill Education, 1985. 
5. K. Ashwathappa, ‘Human Resources and Personnel Management’, TMH, 3 rd. edition, 
2005. 
6. R. B. Chase, Ravi Shankar and F. R. Jacobs, Operations and Supply Chain Management, 
14th ed. McGraw Hill Education (India), 2015. 
7. P C Tripathi and P N Reddy, Principles of management, TMH, 4th edition, 2008. 
BTST2506 Software Engineering L  T  P  C 
3   0   0   3 
Prerequisite: NIL 
Course Description: 
This course covers the fundamentals of software engineering, including understanding system 
requirements, finding appropriate engineering compromises, effective methods of design, 
coding, and testing, team software development, and the application of engineering tools. 
Successful software development depends on an in-depth understanding of how the 
phases and supporting activities of the software development life cycle work together. Each 
phase of the life cycle contributes to a reliable, maintainable product that satisfies user 
requirements. The application of good engineering practices throughout the cycle dramatically 
improves the likelihood of delivering a quality software project on time, in scope and within 
budget. The course will combine a strong technical focus with a capstone project providing the 
opportunity to practice engineering knowledge, skills, and practices in a realistic development 
setting with a real client. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
The course should enable the students to: 
1. Describe and compare various software development methods and understand the 
context in which each approach might be applicable. 
 
2. Develop students’ critical skills to distinguish sound development practices from adhoc 
practices, judge which technique would be most appropriate for solving large- scale 
software problems, and articulate the benefits of applying sound practices. 
 
3. Expand students’ familiarity with mainstream languages used to model and analyse 
object designs (e.g., UML). 
 
4. Demonstrate the importance of formal and executable specifications of object models, 
and the ability to verify the correctness and completeness of the solution by executing 
the models. 
 
5. Explain the scope of the software maintenance problem and demonstrate the use of 
several tools for reverse engineering software. 
 
UNIT – I 9 Hrs 
Introduction  to  Software  Engineering:  Software  characteristics,  Software  components, 
Software applications, Software Engineering Principles, Software metrics and measurement, 
monitoring and control. Software development life-cycle, Water fall model, prototyping model, 
Incremental model, Iterative enhancement Model, Spiral model. 
 
 
UNIT – II                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Software Requirements: Functional and non-functional requirements, user requirements, 
system   requirements, interface   specification, the   software   requirements   document. 
Requirements engineering process: Feasibility studies, requirements elicitation and analysis, 
requirements validation, requirements management. 
 
 
UNIT – III                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Design Engineering: Design process and design quality, design concepts, the design model. 
Creating an architectural design: software architecture, data design, architectural styles and 
patterns, architectural design, conceptual model of UML, basic structural modelling, class 
diagrams, sequence diagrams, collaboration diagrams, use case diagrams, component 
diagrams. 
 
 
UNIT - IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Validation and Verification: A strategic approach to software testing, test strategies for 
conventional software, black-box and white-box testing, validation testing, system testing, the 
art of debugging. Metrics for Process and Products: Software measurement, metrics for 
software quality. 
 
 
UNIT - V 9 Hrs 
Risk management: Reactive Vs proactive risk strategies, software risks, risk identification, 
risk  projection,  risk  refinement,  RMMM,  RMMM  Plan.  Quality  Management:  Quality 
concepts, software quality assurance, software reviews, formal technical reviews, statistical 
software quality assurance, software reliability, the ISO 9000 quality standards. 
Applications: 
Software Engineering in the Context of Health Care Industry: Challenges faced in current 
health care environments, Patient-centric approaches in software engineering, Types of 
software’s used in Health Care Industry, Developing mobile apps and web apps for both 
patients and doctors, smart healthcare. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Apply the principles of the engineering processes in software development. 
2.   Demonstrate software project management activities such as planning, scheduling and 
Estimation. 
3.   Model the requirements for the software projects. 
4.   Prepare software requirement specifications 
5.   Select suitable Software Process model for software development. 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Software Engineering, A practitioner’s Approach- Roger S. Pressman, 6th edition, 
McGraw Hill International Edition. 
2.   Software Engineering- Sommerville, 7th edition, Pearson Education. 
Reference Books: 
1.   The  unified  modelling  language  user  guide  Grady  Booch,  James  Rumbaugh,  Ivar 
Jacobson, Pearson Education. 
2.   Software Engineering, an Engineering approach- James F. Peters, Witold Pedrycz, John 
Wiley. 
3.   Software Engineering principles and practice- Waman S Javadekar, The McGraw-Hill 
Companies. 
4.  Fundamentals of object-oriented design using UML Meiler page-Jones: Pearson Education. 
BTST2304 Database Management Systems L  T  P  C 
3   1   0   4 
Prerequisite: NIL 
Course Description: 
Database Management Systems is intended to provide a clear understanding of fundamentals 
with emphasis on their applications to create and manage large data sets. It emphasizes on 
technical overview of database software to retrieve data from database. This includes database 
design principles, normalization, and concurrent transaction processing, security, recovery and 
file organization techniques. This will provide adequate knowledge to understand future 
evolutions of data technologies. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1.   Discuss the basic database concepts, applications, data models, schemas and instances 
and design Entity Relationship (E-R) model for a database. 
2.   Demonstrate the use of integrity constraints, relational algebra operations and relational 
calculus. 
3.   Describe the basics of SQL, construct queries using SQL, SQL functions, trigger and 
cursor concepts in PL/SQL. 
4.   Understand reasoning about functional dependency and to make the students to identify 
the role of normalization in database management systems. 
5.   To present the students with the knowledge of Transaction, concurrency and recovery 
strategies of DBMS 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                        12 Hrs 
Database Systems and Entity Relationship Modeling 
Database System Applications - Purpose of Database Systems - View of Data - Database 
Languages - Database Users and Administrators - Various Components of overall Database 
System Structure- Data Models-The Entity-Relationship Model - Attributes and Entity Sets - 
Relationship Sets - Entity-Relationship Diagrams. 
UNIT II:                                                                                                                    12 Hrs 
 
Relational Data Model 
Introduction to the Relational Model - Integrity Constraints -Relational algebra selection and 
projection - set operations- renaming – joins -division-examples of algebra queries- Tuple 
Relational Calculus - Domain Relational Calculus-Expressive power of algebra and calculus. 
UNIT III: 12 Hrs 
Introduction to SQL 
 
Structured Query Language (SQL): Introduction to SQL -Data types - Data Definition language 
commands - Data Manipulation language Commands and Data control Language Commands - Candidate Key - Primary key - Foreign key - Select Clause - Where Clause - Logical 
Connectivity’s – AND - OR - Range Search - Pattern Matching - Order By - Group By - Set 
Operations – Union - Intersect and Minus -  Aggregate Functions - Join Operations. PL/SQL: 
Control Structures - functions - Triggers and Cursors. 
 
UNIT IV:                                                                                                                    12 Hrs 
Normalization 
 
Introduction to Schema Refinement - Properties of Decompositions – Functional Dependencies – Attribute closure - Normal Forms - First - Second - Third – BCNF - Basic definitions of 
MVDs and JDs - Fourth and Fifth normal forms. 
 
UNIT V: Transaction Processing Concepts and Concurrency Control Techniques 12 Hrs             
Transaction Concept - Transaction States - Implementation of Atomicity and Durability - 
Serializability - Recoverability - Concurrent Executions - Lock-Based Protocols for 
Concurrency Control - Time Stamp-Based Protocol for Concurrency Control - Multiple 
Granularity Recovery System: Recovery and Atomicity – Log based Recovery – Recovery with 
Concurrent Transactions, Query Processing, Query Optimization, Storage Management 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course - the student will be able to: 
1.  Demonstrate knowledge on Data models and Database Languages and Design Entity 
Relationship model for a database 
2.  Analyse the relational database theory, and be able to write relational algebra and 
relational calculus expressions for queries 
3.   Analyse and evaluate the databases using SQL DML/DDL Commands 
4.   Analyse databases using normal forms to provide solutions for real time applications 
5.  Understand the properties of transactions in a database system, Analyse concurrency 
control techniques for handling concurrent transactions and understand recovery of data 
from failures 
Text Books: 
1.   Henry F. Korth, Silberchatz, Sudarshan, “Database System Concepts”, 7/e, 2019, Tata 
McGraw-Hill, New York. 
2.   Raghu Rama Krishnan, “Database Management System”, 2/e, 2000, Tata McGraw Hill, 
New York. 
Reference Books: 
 
 
1.   Ramez Elmasri, Shamkant B. Navathe, "Fundamental Database Systems", Pearson 
Education, 6th Edition, 2014. 
2.   Database Principles Fundamentals of Design Implementation and Management, Carlos 
Coronel, Steven Morris, Peter Robb, Cengage Learning. 
3.   Database Management Systems, 3/e, Raghurama Krishnan, Johannes Gehrke, TMH 
4.   “Database  Systems,  Concepts,  Design  and  Applications”  by  S.K.Singh,  Pearson 
Education. 
BTST2305 Operating Systems L  T  P  C 
3   1   0   4 
Prerequisite: NIL 
 
Course Description: 
 
This course examines the important problems in operating system design and 
implementation. This discussion will cover the tradeoffs that can be made between 
performance and functionality during the design and implementation of an operating system. 
Particular emphasis will be given to three major OS subsystems: process management 
memory management (segmentation, paging, swapping), and file systems; and on operating 
system support for distributed systems. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To introduce the operating system concepts, designs and provide skills required to 
implement the services. 
2. To describe the trade-offs between conflicting objectives in large scale system design. 
3. To develop the knowledge for application of the various design issues and services. 
4. To familiarize with the important storage mechanisms in operating systems.  
5. Apply various schemes for achieving system protection and security 
 
Unit 1 
Introduction to OS: Functionality of OS - OS design issues - Structuring methods 
(monolithic, layered, modular, micro-kernel models) - Abstractions, processes. 
OS Principles: System calls, System/Application Call Interface – Protection: User/Kernel 
modes - Interrupts 
Unit 2 
Scheduling: Processes Scheduling - CPU Scheduling: Pre-emptive, non-pre-emptive – 
Multiprocessor scheduling – Deadlocks - Resource allocation and management - Deadlock 
handling mechanisms: prevention, avoidance, detection, recovery. 
Concurrency: Inter-process communication, Synchronization - Implementing 
synchronization primitives (Peterson’s solution, Bakery algorithm, synchronization 
hardware) - Semaphores – Classical synchronization problems, Monitors: Solution to Dining 
Philosophers problem 
Unit 3 
Memory Management: Main memory management, Memory allocation strategies, Virtual 
memory: Hardware support for virtual memory (caching, TLB) – Paging - Segmentation - 
Demand Paging - Page Faults – Page Replacement -Thrashing 
Unit 4 
Storage Management, Protection and Security: Disk structure and attachment – Disk 
scheduling algorithms (seek time, rotational latency based)-System threats and security – 
Policy vs mechanism - Access vs authentication 
Unit 5 
System protection: Access matrix – Capability based systems - OS: performance, scaling, 
future directions in mobile OS, Recent Trends. 
Course Outcome: 
 
1. To interpret the evolution of OS functionality, structures and layers. System calls 
and to find the stages of various process states. 
2. To design a model scheduling algorithm to compute various scheduling criteria. 
 
3. To apply and Analyse communication between inter process and synchronization 
techniques.  Implement page replacement algorithms, memory management 
problems and segmentation. 
4. To differentiate the file systems for applying different allocation and access 
techniques. 
5. Develop the security mechanism for system protection. 
 
 
Text Book(s) 
 
1.   Abraham Silberschatz, Peter B. Galvin, Greg Gagne-Operating System Concepts, 
Wiley(2018). 
2.  Stallings (2006), Operating Systems, Internals and Design Principles, 5th edition, 
Pearson Education, India. 
 
Reference Books 
 
1. Ramez Elmasri, A.Gil Carrick, David Levine, Operating Systems, ASpiral Approach- 
McGrawHill Higher Education (2010). 
2. Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, Operating Systems, Three 
 
EasyPieces, Arpaci-Dusseau Books, Inc (2015). 
 
3. Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Modern Operating Systems, Pearson, 4 th Edition (2016). 
 
4. William Stallings, Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles, Pearson, 9 th 
 
Edition (2018). 
BTST2501 Computer Networks L  T  P  C 
3   0   0   3 
Course Description: 
Computer Networks is a fundamental course that provides an in-depth understanding of the 
principles, protocols, and technologies that underpin modern computer networks. This course 
is designed to equip students with the knowledge and skills required to design, implement, and 
manage computer networks, a critical component of today's information technology landscape. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Identify the components required to build various types of networks, understand the 
OSI and TCP/IP architectures. 
2. Understanding MAC sublayer, Routing Protocols and IP addressing. 
3. Learn the use of TCP, UDP protocols. 
4. Develop skills to apply the concept of application layer protocols. 
5. Understanding WLANs. 
 
 
UNIT I Introduction, Physical and Data Link Layer 9 Hrs 
Fundamental Components of Networks – Network Topologies - OSI & TCP/IP References 
models – Transmission Media – Switching – Router - Data link layer design issues - Error 
detection and corrections – Stop and Wait protocol – Sliding window protocol – Go-back N 
protocol. 
 
 
UNIT II MAC and Network Layer 9 Hrs 
MAC - Ethernet - Network layer design issues - Routing algorithms (RIP, OSPF, BGP, DSDV, 
DSR, AODV) – Congestion control algorithms – IPv4 and IPv6 address. 
 
 
UNIT III Transport Layer 9 Hrs 
Elements of transport protocols – Congestion Control - The Internet Transport Protocols: 
UDP, TCP: Introduction – TCP Service model –TCP protocol – TCP segment header – TCP 
Connection Establishment, Connection release – TCP sliding window – TCP timer 
management – TCP Congestion control, STCP.   
UNIT IV Application Layer   9 Hrs 
Domain Name System- Electronic mail (SMTP, POP3, IMAP, MIME) - WWW – HTTP – 
FTP - Web Services - Firewalls. 
 
 
UNIT V WLANs     9 Hrs 
Introduction to Wireless, Components of WLANs, WLAN Operation, Infrastructure 
Networks,  Ad-hoc  Networks,  WLAN  Threats,  Secure  WLANs,  WLAN  Configuration, 
Routing Concepts, IP Static Routing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Demonstrate knowledge on fundamentals of network components and topologies, 
Analyze the OSI and TCP/IP stack and the different protocols in Data Link layer. 
2. Demonstrate various types of routing techniques and design the different routing 
protocols for wired / wireless. 
3. Demonstrate uses of datagram delivery. 
4. Apply the different strategies Operations of DNS, FTP, HTTP, Email Protocols, SNMP 
5. Deploy secure wireless LANs, manage WLAN components, and understand WLAN 
operation, security, and deployment. 
 
 
Text Books: 
 
 
1.   Andrew S. Tanenbaum, David J. Wetherall, “Computer Networks”, Pearson Education, 
New Jersey, 5th edition, 2011. 
2.   Behrouz A. Forouzan, “Data Communications and Networking”, Tata McGraw Hill, New 
Delhi, 5th edition, 2012. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Computer   Networking:   Principles, Protocols   and   Practice, Olivier   Bonaventure, 
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 1st Edition, 2014 
2.   Computer Networks: A Systems Approach, Larry L. Peterson and Bruce S. Davie, 
Morgan Kaufmann, 5th Edition, 2011. 
3.   Network Security Essentials: Applications and Standards, William Stallings, Pearson, 7th 
Edition, 2021. 
4.   Routing and Switching Essentials Companion Guide, Cisco Networking Academy, Cisco 
Press, 1st Edition, 2013 
  
BTST2307    UNIVERSAL HUMAN VALUES                     L   T   P   C 
                 3   0    0    3 
COURSE DESCRIPTION: 
Universal Human Values (UHV) course is intended to help students understand the importance 
of values and skills, and develop a holistic perspective on life. Students explore core values such 
as love, compassion, non-violence, and peace. They also learn about the basics of ethical human 
conduct, and how to identify and address social disparities.  
COURSE OBJECTIVE: 
The objective of the course is fourfold: 
1. Understand the holistic perspective based on self-exploration about themselves (human     
being), family, society and nature/existence. 
2. Learn the basics of ethical human conduct, and how to identify and address social 
disparities.  
3. Understand (or developing clarity) the harmony in the human being, family, society and 
nature/existence strengthening of self-reflection. 
4. Analyze the meaning of happiness and prosperity, and how to live in harmony with 
others. 
5. Development of commitment and courage to act. 
Unit I:            9 Hrs 
Course Introduction - Need, Basic Guidelines, Content and Process for Value Education 
Purpose and motivation for the course, recapitulation from Universal Human Values-I- - Self
Exploration–what is it? - Its content and process; ‘Natural Acceptance’ and Experiential 
Validation- as the process for self-exploration- - Continuous Happiness and Prosperity- A look 
at basic Human Aspirations- -Right understanding, Relationship and Physical Facility- the basic 
requirements for fulfillment of aspirations of every human being with their correct priority- 
Understanding Happiness and Prosperity correctly- A critical appraisal of the current scenario 
Method to fulfill the above human aspirations: understanding and living in harmony at various 
levels. 
Unit II:           9 Hrs 
Understanding Harmony in the Human Being - Harmony in Myself! 
 Understanding human being as a co-existence of the sentient ‘I’ and the material ‘Body’- 
Understanding the needs of Self (‘I’) and ‘Body’ - happiness and physical facility
Understanding the Body as an instrument of ‘I’ (I being the doer, seer and enjoyer)- 
Understanding the characteristics and activities of ‘I’ and harmony in ‘I’- Understanding the 
harmony of I with the Body: Sanyam and Health; correct appraisal of Physical needs, meaning 
of Prosperity in detail- Programs to ensure Sanyam and Health. 
 
 
Unit III:           9 Hrs 
Understanding Harmony in the Family and Society- Harmony in Human- Human 
Relationship 
Understanding values in human-human relationship; meaning of Justice (nine universal values 
in relationships) and program for its fulfillment to ensure mutual happiness; Trust and Respect 
as the foundational values of relationship-Understanding the meaning of Trust; Difference 
between intention and competence- Understanding the meaning of Respect, Difference between 
respect and differentiation; the other salient values in relationship-Understanding the harmony 
in the society (society being an extension of family): Resolution, Prosperity, fearlessness (trust) 
and co-existence as comprehensive Human Goals- Visualizing a universal harmonious order in 
society- Undivided Society, Universal Order from family to world family. 
 
Unit IV:           9 Hrs 
Understanding Harmony in the Nature and Existence - Whole existence as Coexistence 
 Understanding the harmony in the Nature- Interconnectedness and mutual fulfillment among 
the four orders of nature- recyclability and self-regulation in nature- Understanding Existence as 
Co-existence of mutually interacting units in all pervasive space - Holistic perception of 
harmony at all levels of existence. 
 
Unit V:           9 Hrs 
Implications of the above Holistic Understanding of Harmony on Professional 
Ethics 
Natural acceptance of human values - Definitiveness of Ethical Human Conduct- Basis for 
Humanistic Education, Humanistic Constitution and Humanistic Universal Order-  Competence 
in professional ethics: a. Ability to utilize the professional competence for augmenting universal 
human order b. Ability to identify the scope and characteristics of people friendly and eco
friendly production systems, c. Ability to identify and develop appropriate technologies and 
management patterns for above production systems. - Case studies of typical holistic 
Technologies, management models and production systems - Strategy for transition from the 
present state to Universal Human Order: a. At the level of individual: as socially and 
ecologically responsible engineers, technologists and managers b. At the level of society: as 
mutually enriching institutions and organizations - Sum up. 
  
COURSE OUTCOMES: 
By the end of the course, 
1. Students are expected to become more aware of themselves, and their surroundings 
     (family, society, nature) 
2. They would become more responsible in life, and in handling problems with sustainable 
     solutions, while keeping human relationships and human nature in mind. 
3. They would have better critical ability. 
4. They would also become sensitive to their commitment towards what they have understood   
   (human values, human relationship and human society). 
5. It is hoped that they would be able to apply what they have learnt to their own self in different 
day-to-day settings in real life, at least a beginning would be made in this direction. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. R R Gaur, R Asthana, G P Bagaria, “A Foundation Course in Human Values and Professional 
Ethics”, 2nd Revised Edition, Excel Books, New Delhi, 2019. ISBN 978-93-87034-47-1 
2. R R Gaur, R Asthana, G P Bagaria, “Teachers’ Manual for A Foundation Course in Human 
Values and Professional Ethics”, 2nd Revised Edition, Excel Books, New Delhi, 2019. ISBN 
978-93-87034-53-2 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Jeevan Vidya: EkParichaya, A Nagaraj, Jeevan Vidya Prakashan, Amarkantak, 1999. 
2. A.N. Tripathi, “Human Values”, New Age Intl. Publishers, NewDelhi,2004. 
3. The Story of Stuff (Book). 
4. MohandasKaramchandGandhi “The Story of My Experiments with Truth” 
5. E. FSchumacher. “Small is Beautiful” 
6. Slow is Beautiful–Cecile Andrews 
7. J C Kumarappa “Economy of Permanence” 
8. Pandit Sunderlal “Bharat Mein Angreji Raj” 
9. Dharampal, “Rediscovering India” 
10. Mohandas K. Gandhi, “Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule” 
11. India Wins Freedom - Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad 
12. Vivekananda - Romain Rolland (English) 
13. Gandhi - Romain Rolland (English) 
  
BTSL2302                              Database Management Systems Lab                        L   T   P   C 
                                                                                                                                                0   0   2   1 
Course Description: 
This Laboratory course introduces the query language for design and development of a database 
by using various software’s such as SQL, ORACLE etc. It provides practice on built-in SQL 
functions using languages like DDL, DCL, DML and TCL to create and manage database 
systems and perform Set operations, Sub Queries, Joins; and PL/SQL programs to implement 
Exceptions, Cursors, Stored Functions, Views, Sequences, Locks and Triggers. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of conducting this lab is to enable the students to: 
1. Demonstrate practical knowledge on creation and alteration of tables, insertion and querying 
of data and Analyse and evaluate the databases using SQL DML/DDL commands. 
2. Write SQL Queries to implement a Database Schema for the given Database. 
3. Design Simple Database using a Tool and Implement it using SQL. 
4. Implement DDL and DML commands in SQL and PL/SQL, ORACLE to manage data in 
databases. 
5. Programming PL/SQL including procedures, functions, cursors and triggers. 
Experiments: 
1. Practice of DDL and DML Commands and Exercise on DDL and DML Commands 
a. Create student table with the following structure name varchar2(10), rollno 
varchar2(5). 
b. Add branch column to the student table. 
c. Increase the size of rollno column from 5 to 10. 
d. Add marks1, marks2, marks3, dob columns to the student table. 
e. Insert at least 5 rows to the student table 
f. Display name and rollno of all the students. 
g. Add total column to the student table. 
h. calculate the total of every student. 
i. Display the details of ‘cse’ students. 
j. Display the structure of student table. 
k. Display all rows and columns from student table. 
l. Display the name and total obtained by every student. 
m. Display the details of students who got above 250 marks. 
n. Add average column to student table. 
o. Find out the average marks for every student. 
p. Display the details of students who got above 80%. 
q. Modify the branch values from ‘CSE’ to ‘ECE’. 
r. Display the details of students whose dob is 12-05-1991. 
s. Remove details of ECE students. 
t. Remove dob column from student table. 
u. Remove all the records from student table. 
 
2. Practice of SQL Operators (Arithmetic, Logical, Relational, Between and, is null and 
like operator) 
3. Exercise on SQL Operators 
a. Create employee table with the following structure empname varchar2(15), 
empno number(3), salary number(5), deptno number(3). 
b. Insert at least 5 rows into employee table.  
c. Display the details of employee table.  
d. Eliminate duplicate rows from employee table if any.  
e. Eliminate duplicate names in employee table.  
f. Display the details of employee table in salary ascending order.  
g. Display the details of employee table in empname alphabetic order.  
h. Display the details of employee table in salary descending order.  
i. Create table emp1 which is having same information as employee.  
j. Create a table emp2 from emp1 without getting the records of emp1 table.  
k. Display the details of employee table whose salary is <= 8000.  
l. Increment the salaries of employee by 20%.  
m. Display empname, empno who is working in deptno 10;  
n. Display empname, empno who is not working in deptno 30.  
o. Display the details of employee table whose salary in between 8000 and 20000.  
p. Add a column commission number (4) to employee table.  
q. Update the employee table such that, if salary is > 10000 then commission is 
2000.  
r. Update the employee table such that, if salary is between 5000 and 10000 
then commission is 1000. 
s. Display the details of employee whose name contain 3rd letter as ‘r’.  
t. Display the details of employee whose name contains exactly 7 characters.  
u. Display the details of employee whose commission is null.  
v. Display the details of employee who is working in deptno 20 and 30.  
w. Display the details of employee whose commission is not null.  
x. Display the details of employee whose salary is 20000 or deptno is 20. 
y. Display the details of employee whose salary is 25000 and deptno is 10.  
z. Display the details of employee whose salary is not 25000.  
aa. Create table emp3 which contains the details of employee table in ascending 
order of their salary. 
 
4. Practice of different Integrity Constraints like Not null, Check, Primary Key , 
Unique Key and Referential Integrity (Foreign Key) Constraints. 
5. Exercise on Integrity Constraints 
a. Create emp table with the following structure empno number(6), empname 
varchar2(10), job char(10), deptno number(4), salary number(5), comm 
number(3). Job values are Sales executive, Analyst, Manager, Clerk. Allow null 
values for all columns except empno and deptno. 
b. Add a column phoneno number(10) to emp table.  
c. Modify the column width of Job field of emp table.  
d. Create dept table with the following structure deptno number (4) primary key, 
deptname char (15), location char (15). deptname values (Sales, Marketing, 
Production). 
e. Add constraints to emp table such that empno as primary key and deptno as 
foreign key.  
f. Add constraints to emp table to check the value of empno greater than 100 while 
entering values. 
g. Add constraints to emp table such that the default salary is 5000 otherwise 
the values entered by the user. 
h. Add columns DOJ and DOB to emp table.  
i. Insert at least 5 rows into dept table.  
j. Insert at least 10 rows into emp table.  
k. Update the emp table set the value of comm as 999.  
l. Create a table emp1 with the same structure as emp and insert rows into the 
table using select class. 
m. Delete those rows from emp that have deptno value as 10.  
n. Display unique deptno values from emp table.  
o. Display maximum and minimum salary of emp table and display the output 
under heading “Minimum Salary” and “Maximum Salary” respectively. 
p. Find out the average salary of emp table.  
q. Find out the 5th maximum salary of emp table.  
r. Find out the 3rd lowest salary of emp table.  
s. Display the first 3 highest salaries and last 3 lowest salaries from emp table.  
t. Drop the comm column from emp table.  
u. Create a view View1 (empno, deptno, salary) from emp and perform insert, 
delete and update operations. 
v. Create a view View2 (empno, salary) from emp, (deptno, deptname) from dept 
and perform insert, delete and update operations. 
w. Drop the view named View2.  
x. Display all emp values from sales or production.  
y. Display the details of employees who joined between 01-01-2020 and 1-06-2021. 
 
6. Exercise on Relational Algebra operations (Set operations, Different Types of 
Joins like Natural Join, Equi Join, Theta Join and outer join) 
7. Practice of SQL Functions (Number, Character, Date, Conversion and Aggregate 
functions) 
  
 
8. PL/SQL Programs 
a. Write a PL/SQL program to swap two numbers.  
b. Write a PL/SQL program to find the largest of three numbers.  
c. Write a PL/SQL program to find the total and average of 6 subjects and display 
the grade.  
d. Write a PL/SQL program to find the sum of digits in a given number.  
e. Write a PL/SQL program to display the number in reverse order.  
f. Write a PL / SQL program to check whether the given number is perfect number 
or not.  
g. Write a PL/SQL program to find the factorial of a given number.  
h. Write a PL/SQL code block to calculate the area of a circle for a value of radius 
varying from 3 to 7. Store the radius and the corresponding values of calculated 
area in an empty table named areas, consisting of two columns radius and area.  
 
9. Triggers and Cursors 
10. CASE STUDY: GENERAL HOSPITAL 
A General Hospital consists of a number of specialized wards (such as Maternity, Pediatric, 
Oncology, etc). Each ward hosts a number of patients, who were admitted on the 
recommendation of their own GP and confirmed by a consultant employed by the Hospital. On 
admission, the personal details of every patient are recorded. A separate register is to be held to 
store the information of the tests undertaken and the results of a prescribed treatment. A number 
of tests may be conducted for each patient. Each patient is assigned to one leading consultant 
but may be examined by another doctor, if required. Doctors are specialists in some branch of 
medicine and may be leading consultants for a number of patients, not necessarily from the 
same ward.  
For the above case study, do the following. 
• Analyse the data required.  
• Normalize the attributes. 
• Create the logical data model using E-R diagrams. 
CASE STUDY: STUDENT PROGRESS MONITORING SYSTEM  
A database is to be designed for a university to monitor students' progress throughout their 
course of study. The students are reading for a degree (such as BA, BA (Hons) M.Sc., etc) 
within the framework of the modular system. The college provides a number of modules, each 
being characterized by its code, title, credit value, module leader, teaching staff and the 
department they come from. A module is coordinated by a module leader who shares teaching 
duties with one or more lecturers. A lecturer may teach (and be a module leader for) more than 
one module. Students are free to choose any module they wish but the following rules must be 
observed: Some modules require pre- requisites modules and some degree programmes have 
compulsory modules. The database is also to contain some information about students including 
their numbers, names, addresses, degrees they read for, and their past performance i.e. modules 
taken and examination results.  
  
For the above case study, do the following:  
• Analyse the data required.  
• Normalize the attributes.  
• Create the logical data model i.e., ER diagrams 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course - the student will be able to: 
1. Design database for any real-world problem  
2. Define SQL queries  
3. Decide the constraints  
4. Investigate for data inconsistency 
5. Implement PL/SQL programs  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Ivan Bayross, “SQL, PL/SQL Programming”, 2/e, 2011, BPB Publications, New Delhi, 
India. 
2. Satish Ansari, “Oracle Database 11g: Hands-on SQL and PL/SQL”, PHI Publishers, 
2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BTSL2501 
Computer Networks Lab 
L  T  P  C 
0   0   2   1 
Prerequisite: NIL 
Course Description: 
This course offers hands-on exploration of network simulation and protocol design using TCL 
and C++. Topics include creating wired and wireless network scenarios, implementing routing 
algorithms, and simulating security threats. Students gain practical skills in network 
management and protocol analysis, enhancing their understanding of modern communication 
systems. 
Course Objectives: 
1.    
Understand various network simulator tools and functionalities and TCL commands. 
2.    Develop different protocols. 
3.    Learn how to create new agent for Communication. 
4.    Learn how to create new routing protocols for different networks. 
5.    Analysis the different routing protocols using different tools. 
Experiments: 
Network Simulator - http://www.jgyan.com/ns2 
3.   Network Simulator Tutorial - https://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/tutorial/ 
1. Study of TCL Commands. 
2. Write a TCL script to simulate a simple wired network with four nodes. 
3. Design a simple TCP scenario with drop tail queue mechanism on the gateway. 
4. Develop a new agent using a combination of C++ and TCL for network simulation 
5. Design and implement a new protocol for ping using C++ and TCL 
6. Implement Dijkstra‘s algorithm to compute the Shortest path through a graph. 
7. Implement the Link State Routing algorithm to find the shortest distance using link state 
packets. 
8. Write a TCL script to simulate a simple wireless network with DSDV - DSR and AODV 
routing protocols. 
9. Develop a TCL script to simulate a Black Hole Attack scenario and analyze its impact on 
network performance. 
10. Comparison of different routing protocols performance using Xgraph and Gnuplot. 
Course Outcomes: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Demonstrate various network simulator and develop different program using TCL 
commands 
Design and analysis of new protocols. 
SSSSDemonstrate knowledge on various existing agent and design new agent using 
TCL and C++ for communication. 
Demonstrate knowledge on various existing routing protocols and design new routing 
protocols. 
Analysis the different routing protocols performance based on number of nodes and 
speed using different tools. 
Reference Books: 
1.  Issariyakul, Teerawat, Hossain and Ekram,“Introduction to Network Simulator NS2”, 
2/e, Springer US, 2012. 
2.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V SEMESTER 
BTST3501                       ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE                                             L   T   P   C 
3 0 0 3 
 
 
Prerequisite: Python Programming 
Course Description: 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a well-established, exciting branch of computer science 
concerned with methods to make computers, or machines in general, intelligent - so that they 
are able to learn from experience, to derive implicit knowledge from the one given explicitly, 
to understand natural languages such as English, Arabic, or Urdu, to determine the content of 
images, to work collaboratively together, etc. The techniques used in AI are as diverse as the 
problems tackled: they range from classical logic to statistical approaches to simulate brains. 
This pathway reflects the diversity of AI in that it freely combines a number of themes related 
to AI techniques, namely making sense of Complex Data, Learning from Data, Reasoning and 
Optimization. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The primary objective of this course is to introduce the basic principles, techniques, and 
applications of Artificial Intelligence. 
The course should enable the students to: 
1.   Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a fast-moving technology with impacts and implications 
for both individual lives and society as a whole. 
2.   To analyze various search strategies in intelligent systems. 
3.   Become familiar with basic principles of AI towards problem solving, Inference, 
Perception, Knowledge & Reasoning and Learning. 
4.   Investigate applications of AI techniques in intelligent systems, artificial neural 
networks, 
5.   Understanding the concepts of machine learning models and Robotics. 
 
 
UNIT-I 9 Hrs 
Overview of Artificial Intelligence:  AI problems, foundation of AI and history of AI 
intelligent agents:  Agents and Environments, the concept of rationality, the nature 
of environments, structure of agents, problem solving agents, problem formulation. 
 
 
UNIT – II                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Problem Solving and Search strategies: Searching- Searching for solutions, uniformed 
search strategies – Breadth first search, depth first Search. Search with partial information 
(Heuristic search) Hill climbing, A*, AO* Algorithms, Problem reduction, Game Playing- 
Adversial search, Games, mini-max algorithm, optimal decisions in multiplayer games, 
Problem in Game playing, Alpha-Beta pruning, Evaluation functions. 
 
 
UNIT – III                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Knowledge and Reasoning: Knowledge representation issues, predicate logic- logic 
programming, semantic nets- frames and inheritance, constraint propagation, representing 
knowledge using rules, rules-based deduction systems. Reasoning under uncertainty, review of 
probability, Bayes’ probabilistic interferences and Dempster-Shafer theory. 
 
 
UNIT - IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Logic & Knowledge Representation: First order logic. Inference in first order logic, 
propositional vs. first order inference, unification & lifts forward chaining, Backward chaining, 
Resolution, learning from observation, Explanation based learning, Statistical Learning 
methods, Reinforcement Learning. 
 
 
UNIT - V 9 Hrs 
Uncertain Knowledge and Reasoning, Learning, and Robotics: Uncertainty - Acting under 
uncertainty - Basic probability notation - The axioms of probability - Bayes’ rule and its use - 
Learning from observations - Forms of learning - Inductive learning - Learning decision trees. 
Robotics: Introduction-Robot hardware - Robotic perception - Planning to move-Robotic 
software Architectures - Application Domains. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1. Solve basic AI based problems. 
2. Define the concept of Artificial Intelligence. 
3. Apply AI techniques to real-world problems to develop intelligent systems. 
4. Select appropriately from a range of techniques when implementing intelligent 
systems. 
5. Design and Implement robotics using AI techniques. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.  Artificial Intelligence a Modern Approach, 3/e, Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig, 2020, 
Pearson Education 4th edition, New Delhi, India. 
2.  Artificial Intelligence, 3/e, Elaine Rich, Kevin Knight and Shiva Shankar B Nair, 2004, 
Tata McGraw Hill, Hyderabad, India. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. S. Russel and P. Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence – A Modern Approach”, Second 
Edition, Pearson Education. 
2. David Poole, Alan Mackworth, Randy Goebel,” Computational Intelligence: a logical 
approach”, Oxford University Press. 
3. G. Luger, “Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for complex problem 
solving”, Fourth Edition, Pearson Education. 
4. Rich, Knight, Nair: Artificial Intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill, Third Edition 2009. 
BTST3502 CRYPTOGRAPHY AND NETWORK SECURITY L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Prerequisite: Computer Networks 
Course Description: 
The aim of this course is to introduce the student to the areas of cryptography and cryptanalysis. 
This course develops a basic understanding of the algorithms used to protect users online and 
to understand some of the design choices behind these algorithms. The course emphasizes to 
give a basic understanding of previous attacks on cryptosystems with the aim of preventing 
future attacks. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand basics of Cryptography and Network Security. 
2. To learn encrypt and decrypt messages using block ciphers. 
3. Understanding existing authentication and key agreement protocols. 
4. Understanding e-mail and file security software, PGP, and efficiently use the code to 
encrypt and sign messages. 
5. Understanding and analysing SSL or Firewall based solutions against security threats, 
employ access control techniques. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Classical Encryption Techniques: Security attacks - Security services and mechanisms - A 
model for Network Security – Classical encryption techniques - Symmetric cipher model - 
Substitution techniques - Caesar Cipher – Mono alphabetic Cipher - Play fair Cipher - Hill 
Cipher - Transposition techniques. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                            10 Hrs 
Block Ciphers- Data Encryption Standards and Public Key Cryptography: Simplified 
DES - Block Cipher Principles - DES – AES - Block Cipher Design Principles - Block Cipher 
modes of Operation - Public Key Cryptography - Principles of Public Key Cryptosystems - 
The RSA Algorithm -Diffie Hellman Key Exchange. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                           8 Hrs 
Message Authentication Codes - Hash Functions and Digital Signatures: Message 
Authentication Requirements - Message Authentication Functions - Message Authentication 
Codes - Hash Functions - Security of Hash Functions and MACs - Hash algorithms – SHA – 
HMAC - Digital Signatures -Digital Signature Standard (DSS) - Authentication applications – 
Kerberos - X.509 Authentication Service. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Electronic Mail and IP Security: Pretty good privacy - S/MIME - IPsec overview – 
architecture - Authentication Header and Encapsulating security pay load - combining security 
associates. 
UNIT V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Web Security-Intruders-Firewalls: Web security considerations - Secure socket layer and 
transport layer security - Secure electronic transaction - Intruders - Intrusion detection - 
Password management - Firewall design and principles - Trusted systems. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course the student: 
1. Identify computer and network security threats, classify the threats and develop a security 
model to prevent, detect and recover from the attacks. 
2. Able to encrypt and decrypt the messages. 
3. Analyze and compare the existing authentication codes and key agreement protocols. 
4. Apply e-mail and file security software’s. 
5. Analyze different attacks on networks and evaluate the performance of security protocols 
like SSL, TLS and firewalls. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practices,8/e, William Stallings, 
Global Edition, 2023, Pearson Education. 
2. Network Security and Cryptography, 1/e, Bernard Menezes, 2010, Thomson Press Ltd, 
USA. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Principles and Practices of Information Security,4/e, Michal E. Whitman and Herbert J. 
Mattord, 2012, Cengage Learning, New Delhi. 
2. Network Security Essentials (Applications and Standards), 4/e, William Stallings Pearson 
Education. 
3. Hack Proofing your network , 2/e ,Ryan Russell, Dan Kaminsky, Rain Forest Puppy, Joe 
Grand, David Ahmad, Hal Flynn IdoDubrawsky, Steve W.Manzuik and Ryan Permeh, 
wiley Dreamtech, 2002. 
4. Fundamentals of Network Security, 1/e, Eric Maiwald (Dreamtech press) ,2008. 
5.  Network Security - Private Communication in a Public World,2/e, Charlie Kaufman, 
Radia Perlman and Mike Speciner,2002, Pearson/PHI. 
BTST3301 AUTOMATA AND COMPILER DESIGN L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                      3   1 0   4 
Prerequisite: - 
 
Course Description: 
 
Automata and Compiler Design is a foundational computer science course that explores the 
theoretical underpinnings of formal languages, automata theory, and the design of 
programming language compilers. This course provides students with a comprehensive 
understanding of the theoretical concepts and practical applications necessary for building 
efficient and robust compilers. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Able to understand the concept of abstract machines, construct FA, Regular Expressions 
for the regular languages and equivalent FSMs. 
2.   Able to construct pushdown automata equivalent to Context free Grammars, construct 
Turing Machines and understand undecidability. 
3.   Emphasize the concepts learnt in phases of compiler, lexical analyser and Top-down parser. 
4.   Able to understand the concepts of Bottom-up parser, Intermediate Code Generation. 
5.   Able to understand the concepts of Code optimizer and Code Generation.                                                                                                                          
 
Unit-I: Introduction to Automata and Regular Expressions                            12 Hrs 
 
Introduction, Alphabets, Strings and Languages, Chomsky Hierarchy, Automata and Grammars, 
Regular Grammar and Language, Finite Automata, Deterministic finite Automata (DFA), 
Nondeterministic finite Automata (NFA), Equivalence of NFA and DFA, Minimization of 
Finite Automata, Regular Expressions, Converting Regular Grammar and Expression into Finite 
Automata, Pumping lemma for regular sets, Closure properties of regular sets (Without proof). 
 
 
UNIT-II: Context Free Grammars and Pushdown Automata                 12 Hrs                                     
Context Free Language, Context Free Grammar, Derivation and Parse tree, Ambiguity, 
Simplification of CFG’s, Chomsky Normal Form, Greibach Normal Form, Push Down 
Automata (PDA), Design of PDA, Equivalence of PDA and CFL/CFG 
 
 
UNIT-III: Turing Machines and Introduction to Compilers             12 Hrs                                            
Turing Machine, TM Model, Language acceptance, Design of Turing Machine, Compilers, 
Phases of Compiler, The role of Lexical Analyzer, Input Buffering. 
UNIT-IV: Parsers and Intermediate Code Generation                  12 Hrs                                            
Parser, Top-Down parsers: Recursive Descent Parsers, Predictive Parsers 
 Bottom–up Parsers: Shift-Reduce Parsing, LR parsers, Intermediate Code Generation: Three 
address codes. 
 
 
 
 
UNIT-V: Code Optimization and Code Generation                12 Hrs                                             
Code Optimization: Peephole optimization, Basic blocks and flow graphs, DAG, Principles of 
Source Code Optimization, Code Generation: Issues in Design of Code Generation, Simple 
Code Generator. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Demonstrate knowledge on Automata Theory, Regular Expression and Analyze and 
Design of finite automata, and prove equivalence of various finite automata. 
2.   Demonstrate knowledge on context free grammar, Analyze and design of PDA and TM. 
3.   Understand the basic concept of compiler design, and its different phases which will be 
helpful to construct new tools like LEX, YACC, etc. 
4.   Ability to implement semantic rules into a parser that performs attribution while parsing 
and apply error detection and correction methods. 
5.   Apply the code optimization techniques to improve the space and time complexity of 
programs while programming and Ability to design a compiler. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Introduction to Automata theory languages and Computation, Hopcroft H.E. and Ullman 
            Jeffrey.D, 3/e, 2006, Pearson Education, New Delhi, India. 
2. Mishra K L P and Chandrasekaran N, “Theory of Computer Science - Automata, 
Languages and Computation”, 2/e, 2007, PHI, New Delhi, India. 
3. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, Updated 2e July 2023 Alfred V. 
Aho , Monica S. Lam, Ravi Sethi , Jeffrey D. Ullman , Sorav Bansal  
 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Introduction to Languages and Theory of Computation, John C Martin, 1/e, 2009, Tata 
McGraw Hill Education, Hyderabad, India. 
2.   Introduction to Theory of Computation, Sipser, 2/e, 2005, Thomson, Australia. 
3.   Compiler Construction: Principles And Practice, Kenneth C. Louden, Thomson/ Delmar 
Cengage Learning, 2006. 
4.   Lex & yacc, Doug Brown, John Levine and Tony Mason, 2 nd Edition, O’reilly Media 
5.   Engineering  a  compiler,  Keith  Cooper  and  Linda  Torczon,  2  nd  Edition,  Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2011. 
SOTT3401a OBJECT ORIENTED ANALYSIS AND DESIGN L  T P C 
3  0 0 3 
Course Description: 
Object-Oriented Analysis and Design is a technical approach for analyzing, designing a 
system by applying the object-orientated concepts, and develops a set of graphical system 
models during the development life cycle of the software. OOAD in modern software 
engineering is typically conducted in an iterative and incremental way. In this course, the 
students will learn how to produce detailed object models and designs from system 
requirements; use the modelling concepts provided by UML; identify use cases and expand 
into full behavioral designs; expand the analysis into a design ready for implementation and 
construct designs that are reliable. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Describe the activities in the different phases of the object-oriented development lifecycle. 
2. Understand the concepts of object-oriented model with the E-R and EER models. 
3. Model a real-world application by using UML diagram. 
4. Design architectural modelling. 
5. Describing an application of UML. 
 
 
UNIT – I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Introduction to UML: Importance of modelling, principles of modelling, object-oriented 
modelling, conceptual model of the UML, Architecture, Software Development Life Cycle. 
 
UNIT – II 9 Hrs 
Basic Structural Modelling: Classes, Relationships, common Mechanisms, and diagrams. 
Advanced Structural Modelling: Advanced classes, advanced relationships, Interfaces, Types 
and Roles, Packages. Class & Object Diagrams: Terms, concepts, modelling techniques for 
Class & Object Diagrams. 
 
 
UNIT – III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Basic Behavioural Modelling-I: Interactions, Interaction diagrams. 
Basic Behavioural Modelling-II: Use cases, Use case Diagrams, Activity Diagrams. 
 
 
UNIT – IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Advanced Behavioral Modelling: Events and signals, state machines, processes and Threads, 
time and space, state chart diagrams. Architectural Modelling: Component, Deployment, 
Component diagrams and Deployment diagrams. 
 
 
UNIT – V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Patterns and Frameworks, Artifact Diagrams. Case Study: The Unified Library application. 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to 
1. The importance of modelling in UML. 
2. Compare and contrast the object-oriented model with the E-R and EER models. 
3. Design use case diagram. 
4. Design an application using deployment diagram. 
5. Apply UML diagrams to build library application. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Grady Booch, James Rumbaugh, Ivar Jacobson: The Unified Modelling Language User 
Guide, Pearson Education 2nd Edition. 
2. Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with the Unified Process By John W. Satzinger, Robert 
B Jackson and Stephen D Burd, Cengage Learning. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Meilir Page-Jones: Fundamentals of Object-Oriented Design in UML, Pearson Education. 
2.   Pascal Roques: Modelling Software Systems Using UML2, WILEY-Dreamtech India Pvt. 
Ltd. 
3.   Atul Kahate: Object Oriented Analysis & Design, The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
4.   Mark Priestley: Practical Object-Oriented Design with UML, TMH. 
5.   Appling UML and Patterns: An introduction to Object – Oriented Analysis and Design and 
Unified Process, Craig Larman, Pearson Education 
 
SOTT3401b                              SOFTWARE ENGINEERING                                 L   T   P C 
         3   0    0   3 
 
Course Description: 
This course covers the fundamentals of software engineering, including understanding system 
requirements, finding appropriate engineering compromises, effective methods of design, 
coding, and testing, team software development, and the application of engineering tools. 
Successful software development depends on an in-depth understanding of how the 
phases and supporting activities of the software development life cycle work together. Each 
phase of the life cycle contributes to a reliable, maintainable product that satisfies user 
requirements. The application of good engineering practices throughout the cycle dramatically 
improves the likelihood of delivering a quality software project on time, in scope and within 
budget. The course will combine a strong technical focus with a capstone project providing the 
opportunity to practice engineering knowledge, skills, and practices in a realistic development 
setting with a real client. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1. Describe and compare various software development methods and understand the 
context in which each approach might be applicable. 
 
2. Develop students’ critical skills to distinguish sound development practices from adhoc 
practices, judge which technique would be most appropriate for solving large- scale 
software problems, and articulate the benefits of applying sound practices. 
 
3. Expand students’ familiarity with mainstream languages used to model and analyse 
object designs (e.g., UML). 
 
4. Demonstrate the importance of formal and executable specifications of object models, 
and the ability to verify the correctness and completeness of the solution by executing 
the models. 
 
5. Explain the scope of the software maintenance problem and demonstrate the use of 
several tools for reverse engineering software. 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Introduction to Software Engineering: Software characteristics, Software components, 
Software applications, Software Engineering Principles, Software metrics and measurement, 
monitoring and control. Software development life-cycle, Water fall model, prototyping model, 
Incremental model, Iterative enhancement Model, Spiral model. 
 
 
UNIT II           9 Hrs 
Software Requirements: Functional and non-functional requirements, user requirements, 
system requirements, interface specification, the software requirements document. 
Requirements engineering process: Feasibility studies, requirements elicitation and analysis, 
requirements validation, requirements management. 
 
 
 
UNIT III    9 Hrs 
Design Engineering: Design process and design quality, design concepts, the design model. 
Creating an architectural design: software architecture, data design, architectural styles and 
patterns, architectural design, conceptual model of UML, basic structural modelling, class 
diagrams, sequence diagrams, collaboration diagrams, use case diagrams, component 
diagrams. 
 
 
UNIT IV     9 Hrs 
Validation and Verification: A strategic approach to software testing, test strategies for 
conventional software, black-box and white-box testing, validation testing, system testing, the 
art of debugging. Metrics for Process and Products: Software measurement, metrics for 
software quality. 
 
 
UNIT V     9 Hrs 
Risk management: Reactive Vs proactive risk strategies, software risks, risk identification, 
risk projection, risk refinement, RMMM, RMMM Plan.  Quality Management:  Quality 
concepts, software quality assurance, software reviews, formal technical reviews, statistical 
software quality assurance, software reliability, the ISO 9000 quality standards. 
Applications: 
Software Engineering in the Context of Health Care Industry: Challenges faced in current 
health care environments, Patient-centric approaches in software engineering, Types of 
software’s used in Health Care Industry, Developing mobile apps and web apps for both 
patients and doctors, smart healthcare. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Apply the principles of the engineering processes in software development. 
2.   Demonstrate software project management activities such as planning, scheduling and 
Estimation. 
3.   Model the requirements for the software projects. 
4.   Prepare software requirement specifications 
5.   Select suitable Software Process model for software development. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Software Engineering, A practitioner’s Approach- Roger S. Pressman, 6th edition, 
McGraw Hill International Edition. 
2.   Software Engineering- Sommerville, 7th edition, Pearson Education. 
Reference Books: 
1.   The unified modelling language user guide Grady Booch, James Rumbaugh, Ivar 
Jacobson, Pearson Education. 
2. Software Engineering, an Engineering approach- James F. Peters, Witold Pedrycz, John 
Wiley. 
3.   Software Engineering principles and practice- Waman S Javadekar, The McGraw-Hill 
Companies. 
SOTT3401c                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE                                            L   T   P   C 
3 0 0 3 
 
 
Prerequisite: Python Programming 
Course Description: 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a well-established, exciting branch of computer science 
concerned with methods to make computers, or machines in general, intelligent - so that they 
are able to learn from experience, to derive implicit knowledge from the one given explicitly, 
to understand natural languages such as English, Arabic, or Urdu, to determine the content of 
images, to work collaboratively together, etc. The techniques used in AI are as diverse as the 
problems tackled: they range from classical logic to statistical approaches to simulate brains. 
This pathway reflects the diversity of AI in that it freely combines a number of themes related 
to AI techniques, namely making sense of Complex Data, Learning from Data, Reasoning and 
Optimization. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The primary objective of this course is to introduce the basic principles, techniques, and 
applications of Artificial Intelligence. 
The course should enable the students to: 
1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a fast-moving technology with impacts and implications 
for both individual lives and society as a whole. 
2.  To analyze various search strategies in intelligent systems. 
3. Become familiar with basic principles of AI towards problem solving, Inference, 
Perception, Knowledge & Reasoning and Learning. 
4.  Investigate applications of  AI  techniques  in  intelligent  systems,  artificial  neural 
networks, 
5. Understanding the concepts of machine learning models and Robotics. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Overview of Artificial Intelligence:  AI problems, foundation  of  AI  and  history  of  AI 
intelligent  agents:  Agents  and  Environments,  the  concept  of  rationality,  the  nature  of 
environments, structure of agents, problem solving agents, problem formulation. 
 
 
UNIT  II                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Problem Solving and Search strategies: Searching- Searching for solutions, uniformed 
search strategies – Breadth first search, depth first Search. Search with partial information 
(Heuristic search) Hill climbing, A*, AO* Algorithms, Problem reduction, Game Playing- 
Adversial search, Games, mini-max algorithm, optimal decisions in multiplayer games, 
Problem in Game playing, Alpha-Beta pruning, Evaluation functions. 
 
 
UNIT  III                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Knowledge and Reasoning: Knowledge representation issues, predicate logic- logic 
programming, semantic nets- frames and inheritance, constraint propagation, representing 
knowledge using rules, rules-based deduction systems. Reasoning under uncertainty, review of 
probability, Bayes’ probabilistic interferences and Dempster-Shafer theory. 
 
 
UNIT  IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Logic & Knowledge Representation: First order logic. Inference in first order logic, 
propositional vs. first order inference, unification & lifts forward chaining, Backward chaining, 
Resolution, learning from observation, Explanation based learning, Statistical Learning 
methods, Reinforcement Learning. 
 
 
UNIT  V 9 Hrs 
Uncertain Knowledge and Reasoning, Learning, and Robotics: Uncertainty - Acting under 
uncertainty - Basic probability notation - The axioms of probability - Bayes’ rule and its use - 
Learning from observations - Forms of learning - Inductive learning - Learning decision trees. 
Robotics: Introduction-Robot hardware - Robotic perception - Planning to move-Robotic 
software Architectures - Application Domains. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1. Solve basic AI based problems. 
2. Define the concept of Artificial Intelligence. 
3. Apply AI techniques to real-world problems to develop intelligent systems. 
4. Select appropriately from a range of techniques when implementing intelligent 
systems. 
5. Design and Implement robotics using AI techniques. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Artificial Intelligence a Modern Approach, 3/e, Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig, 2020, 
Pearson Education 4th edition, New Delhi, India. 
2. Artificial Intelligence, 3/e, Elaine Rich, Kevin Knight and Shiva Shankar B Nair, 2004, 
Tata McGraw Hill, Hyderabad, India. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. S. Russel and P. Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence – A Modern Approach”, Second 
Edition, Pearson Education. 
2. David Poole, Alan Mackworth, Randy Goebel,” Computational Intelligence: a logical 
approach”, Oxford University Press. 
3. G. Luger, “Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for complex problem 
solving”, Fourth Edition, Pearson Education. 
4. Rich, Knight, Nair: Artificial Intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill, Third Edition 2009. 
SOTT3401d COMPUTER ORGANIZATION AND ARCHITECTURE L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Course Description: 
Computer Architecture is a core curriculum of computing and engineering programs, which 
aims to cultivate students’ abilities towards the basic architecture of uniprocessor in terms of 
system performance. Studies of recent high-performance microprocessors, vector processors, 
and memory systems design to improve cache performance, multi-programming and I/O design 
improvements like: program I/O VS Interrupt driven I/O. The design optimization of PAL or 
PLA’s. Finally on top of technology the implementation of FPGA and CPLD’s 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To provide the understanding on basic structure and digital computer operations 
2. To develop the skills on different communication methods with I/O devices and interfaces 
3. To deliver the knowledge of the architecture and assembly language programming of 
8085 microprocessor.  
4. To understand the peripherals and their interfacing with 8085 microprocessors. 
5. To analyse the concept of different levels of RAID and taxonomy of parallel machine 
models. 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs  
Introduction To Computer Systems - Overview of Organization and Architecture - Functional 
components of a computer -Registers and register files-Interconnection of components 
Organization of the von Neumann machine and Harvard architecture- Performance of 
processor. Data representation, fixed and floating point and error detecting codes.  
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Fundamentals of Computer Architecture: Introduction to ISA (Instruction Set Architecture)- 
Instruction formats- Instruction types and addressing modes- Instruction execution (Phases of 
instruction cycle)- Assembly language programming-Subroutine call and return mechanisms
Single cycle Data path design-Introduction to multi cycle data path-Multi cycle Instruction 
execution.  
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs  
CPU Micro Programmed Control: Control memory, address sequencing, micro program 
example, and design of control unit. Computer Arithmetic: Fixed point representation of 
numbers algorithms for arithmetic operations: multiplication (Booths, Modified Booths) - 
division (restoring and non- restoring) - Floating point representation with IEEE standards and 
algorithms for common arithmetic operations- Representation of non-numeric data (character 
codes).  
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs  
The Memory System: Memory systems hierarchy-Main memory organization-Types of Main 
memory-memory inter- leaving and its characteristics and performance- Cache memories: 
address mapping-line size- replacement and policies- coherence- Virtual memory systems- TLB 
Reliability of memory systems- error detecting and error correcting systems.  
UNIT V                                                                                                                            9 Hrs  
Device Subsystems: Externa lst- RAID Levels- I/O Performance. Performance Enhancements: 
Classification of models - Flynn’s taxonomy of parallel machine models (SISD, SIMD, MISD, 
MIMD)- Introduction to Pipelining- Pipelined data path-Introduction to hazards. Contemporary 
issues: Recent Trends: Multiprocessor architecture: Overview of Shared Memory architecture, 
Distributed architecture. 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. To recognize the functionalities of computer architecture and its components. 
2. To apply various basic algorithms and operations to solve complex arithmetic problems 
complying with IEEE standards.  
3. To apply the concepts of memory management for analysis of system performance. 
4. To identify the I/O components of computer architecture and their performance. 
5. To describe pipelining mechanisms and recognize different parallel machine models. 
 
Text Books: 
1. M. Morris Mano, Computer System Architecture, 3rdedition,PHI,India, 2006.  
2. Carl Hamacher, ZvonksVranesic, SafeaZaky, Computer Organization, 5th edition, 
McGraw Hill, New Delhi,India,2010.  
 
Reference Books:  
1. William Stallings, Computer Organization and Architecture, designing for performance, 
8 th edition, Prentice Hall, NewJersy, 2010. 
2. Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Structured Computer Organization, 5th edition, Pearson 
Education Inc, NewJersy, 2006. 3. Sivarama P. Dandamudi, Fundamentals of Computer 
Organization and Design, Springer Int. Edition, USA, 2003 
3. David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy Computer Organization and Design-The 
Hardware/Software Interface 5th edition, Morgan Kaufmann, 2013 
4. Tanenbaum, A.S ,2016. Structured computer organisation., Pearson Education, India 
 
SOTT3401e LINUX PROGRAMMING L   T   P    C 
3    0   0    3 
PRE-REQUISITES: A course on Operating Systems 
Course Description: 
This course explains the fundamental ideas behind the open-source operating system 
approach to programming. Knowledge of Linux helps to understand OS level programming. 
Like the successful computer languages t h a t  came before, Linux is the blend of the best 
elements of its rich heritage combined w i t h the innovative concepts required by its unique 
environment.  This course involves kernel concepts, basics commands, shell scripting, file 
processing, Socket programming, Processes, Inter process communication.  This course is 
presented to students by power point projections, course handouts, lecture notes, 
assignments, objective and subjective tests. 
 
 
Course O objectives: 
1. To teach principles of operating system including File handling utilities, Security by 
file permissions, Process utilities, Disk utilities, Networking Commands, Basic 
Linux commands, Scripts and filters. 
2. To familiarize fundamentals of the Bourne again shell (bash), shell programming, 
pipes, input and output redirection Control structures, arithmetic in shell interrupt 
processing, functions, debugging shell scripts. 
3. To impart fundamentals of file concepts kernel support for file, File structure related 
system calls (file API’s). 
4. To facilitate students in understanding Inter process communication. 
5. To facilitate students in understanding semaphore and shared memory. 
6. To facilitate students in understanding process. 
 
 
UNIT I         9 Hrs 
Introduction to Linux a nd Linux Utilities: A brief history of LINUX, architecture  of 
LINUX, features  of LINUX, introduction  to vi editor. Linux  commands- PATH,  man, 
echo, printf, script, passwd,  uname,  who, date, stty, pwd, cd, mkdir, rmdir, ls, cp, mv, 
rm, cat, more, wc, lp, od, tar, gzip, file handling  utilities, security  by file permissions, 
process  utilities,  disk  utilities,  networking commands, Text Processing utilities  and 
backup utilities, uniq, grep, egrep, fgrep, cut, paste, join, tee, pg, comm, cmp, diff, tr, awk. 
 
 
UNIT II           9 Hrs 
Introduction to  S h e lls : Linux S e s s i o n , Standard Streams, Redirection, Pipes, Tee 
Command, Command Execution, Command-Line Editing, Quotes, Command Substitution, 
Job  Control,   Aliases,  Variables, Predefined Variables, Options, Shell/Environment 
Customization. 
Filters: Filters and Pipes, Concatenating f i l e s , Display Beginning and End of files, Cut 
and  Paste, Sorting, Translating Characters, Files with Duplicate Lines, Count Characters, 
Words or Lines, Comparing Files. 
UNIT III           9 Hrs 
Grep: Operation, grep Family, Searching for File Content. 
Sed: Scripts, Operation,  Addresses,  commands,  Applications,  grep and sed. 
Unix  file  Structure: Introduction  to  UNIX  file  system,  I n o d e  ( Index  Node),  file 
descriptors, system calls and device drivers. 
File Management: File  Structures, System  Calls  for  File  Management –  create,  open, 
close, read, write, lseek, link, symlink, unlink, stat, fstat, lstat, chmod, chown, Directory 
API – opendir, readdir, closedir, mkdir, rmdir, umask. 
 
 
UNIT IV        9 Hrs 
Process and Signals: Process, process identifiers, process structure: process table, viewing 
processes, system processes, p r o c e s s scheduling, starting new  processes:  waiting for  a 
process, zombie processes, orphan process, fork, vfork, exit, wait, waitpid, exec, signals 
functions,  unreliable signals,  interrupted  system  calls,  kill,  raise,  alarm,  pause,  abort, 
system, sleep functions, signal sets. File locking: creating lock files, locking regions, use 
of read and write with locking, competing locks, other lock commands, deadlocks. 
 
 
UNIT V         9 Hrs 
Inter Process Communication:   Pipe, process pipes, the pipe call, parent  and child 
processes, and named pipes: fifos, semaphores: semget, semop, semctl, message queues: 
msgget, msgsnd, msgrcv, msgctl, shared memory: shmget, shmat, shmdt, shmctl, ipc status 
commands. 
Introduction to Sockets: Socket, socket connections - socket attributes, socket addresses, 
socket, connect, bind, listen, accept, socket communications. 
 
 
Course Ou tcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1. Ability to   use   various Linux commands that are used to  manipulate system 
operations at admin level and a prerequisite  to pursue job as a Network 
administrator. 
2. Ability to write Shell Programming using Linux commands. 
3. Ability to design and write application to manipulate internal kernel level Linux 
File System. 
4. Ability to develop IPC-API’s that can be used to control various 
processes for synchronization. 
5. Ability  to develop  Network  Programming  that  allows  applications  to   make 
efficient use of resources available on different machines in a network. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   W. Richard. Stevens ( 2005), Advanced P r o g r a m m i n g in the UNIX Environment, 
3rd edition, Pearson Education, New Delhi, India. 
2.  Unix and shell Programming Behrouz A. Forouzan, Richard F. Gilberg. Thomson 
 
References: 
1.   Linux System Programming, Robert Love, O’Reilly, SPD. 
2.   Advanced Programming in the UNIX environment, 2nd Edition, W.R. Stevens, 
Pearson Education. 
3.   UNIX Network Programming, W.R. Stevens, PHI. 
4.  UNIX for Programmers and Users, 3rd Edition, Graham Glass, King Ables, Pearson 
Education 
SOTTT3401f                             ADVANCED DATA STRUCTURES                           L  T  P C 
3  0 0  3 
 
 
Course Description: 
In this course, students will learn about data structures, like graphs, that are fundamental for 
working with structured real-world data. You will develop, implement, and analyse 
algorithms    for    working    with    this    data    to    solve    real    world    problems. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to, 
1.   Gain knowledge and get familiarize with C++. 
 
2.   Be familiar with utilization of the concepts and techniques in problem solving. 
 
3.   Carry out asymptotic analysis of algorithm. 
 
4.   Analyze and can perform the operations related to dictionaries, sort. 
 
5.   Have a comprehensive knowledge of various non - linear data structures and 
algorithms. 
 
UNIT I:                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
The Origins of C++, What is Object Oriented Programming, some C++ fundamentals, C++ 
Class Overview-Class Definition, Objects, Class Members Access Control, Constructors 
and Destructors, Inline functions, this pointer, friend functions, Exception handling. 
 
 
UNIT II:   9 Hrs 
Function Overloading, Operator Over loading, Generic Programming–Function and Class 
Templates, Inheritance basics, base and derived classes, inheritance types, base class access 
control, runtime polymorphism using virtual functions, abstract classes. 
 
 
UNIT III:    9 Hrs 
Algorithms, performance analysis - Asymptotic notations - time complexity and space 
complexity. Review of basic data structures - List ADT– Linked Representation – Singly 
Linked List – Doubly linked List – Applications of lists-Stack ADT – Queue ADT – 
Implementation using template classes in C++. 
 
 
UNIT IV:                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Dictionaries-Operations and Implementations-Hashing – General Idea – Hash Function – 
Separate Chaining – Open Addressing – Linear Probing, quadratic probing- Priority Queues 
(Heaps) – Simple implementations – Binary Heap – Heap Sort. 
 
 
  
UNIT V:                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Search trees: Binary tree traversals-Binary search trees, Definition ADT, Implementation- 
AVL Trees, Implementation- Definition, Red-Black Trees and Splay Trees, B-Trees, 
Implementations, Comparison of Search Trees. 
Graphs: Basic concepts, Graph Representation, Graph traversal (DFS & BFS). 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the subject, students will be able to: 
1.   Understand the concepts and properties of C++. 
2.   Apply the concepts and techniques of problem solving. 
3.   Compare and analyze basic techniques of algorithm analysis. 
4.   Understand advanced abstract data type (ADT) and data structures and their 
Implementations. 
5.   Choose appropriate non-linear data structure applied to specified problem definition. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.  E Bala Guruswamy, ”Object oriented Programming with C++”,TMH, 4th Ed, 2008. 
2.  Sahani S,” Data structures Algorithms and Applications using C++”, University 
Press (India) Pvt. Ltd, 2nd edition, 2004. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Adam Drozdek, “Data Structures and Algorithms in C++”, India Edition, 3rd 
Edition,2004. 
2.   Gav Pai, ”Data Structures and Algorithms”, McGraw Hill Education, 2008. 
3.   Ananda Rao Akepogu, Radhika Raju Palagiri,”Data structures and Algorithms using 
C++”, Pearson Education, 2010. 
SOTT3401g DATA WAREHOUSING AND MINING 
L  T  P C 
3   0  0  3 
Course Description: 
This course will introduce the concepts of data ware house and data mining, which gives a 
complete description about the principles, used, architectures, applications, design and 
implementation of data mining and data ware housing concepts. 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1. Identify the scope and necessity of data mining & warehousing for the society. 
2. Describe the designing of data warehousing so that it can be able to solve the root 
problems. 
3. To understand various tools of data mining and their techniques to solve the real time 
problems. . 
4. To develop ability to design various algorithms based on data mining tools. 
5. To develop further interest in research and design of new data mining techniques. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                               
9 Hrs 
Data Warehousing: Data Warehouse and OLAP Technology for Data Mining Data 
Warehouse, Multidimensional    
Data Model, Data    
Warehouse    
Architecture, Data 
Warehouse Implementation, Further Development of Data Cube Technology, From Data 
Warehousing to Data Mining. 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              
9 Hrs 
Data Mining: Data Mining Functionalities – Data Preprocessing – Data Cleaning – Data 
Integration and Transformation – Data Reduction – Data Discretization and Concept Hierarchy 
Generation- Architecture of A Typical Data Mining Systems- Classification Of Data Mining 
Systems. 
Association Rule Mining: Efficient and Scalable Frequent Item set Mining Methods – Mining 
Various Kinds of Association Rules – Association Mining to Correlation Analysis – 
Constraint-Based Association Mining. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            
9 Hrs 
Classification and Prediction: Issues Regarding Classification and Prediction, 
Classification by Decision Tree Induction, Bayesian Classification, Classification by Back 
propagation, Classification Based on Concepts from Association Rule Mining, Other 
Classification Methods, Prediction, Classifier Accuracy. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             
9 Hrs 
Cluster Analysis: Types of Data in Cluster Analysis, A Categorization of Major Clustering 
Methods, Partitioning Methods, Density-Based Methods, Grid-Based Methods, Model- 
Based Clustering Methods, Outlier Analysis. 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                             
9 Hrs 
Mining Complex Types of Data: 
Multidimensional Analysis and Descriptive Mining of Complex Data Objects – Spatial Data 
Mining – Multimedia Data Mining – Text Mining – Mining the World Wide Web. 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to: 
1.   Acquire a thorough knowledge in data warehousing architecture and implementation. 
2.   Apply data preprocessing techniques using modern tools. 
3.   Create association rule for mining the data in real time. 
4.   Design and deploy appropriate classification and cluster high dimensional data for 
better organization of data. 
5.   Evaluate various mining techniques on complex data objects. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber and Jian Pei“Data Mining Concepts and Techniques”, 
Third Edition, Elsevier, 2011. 
2. Pang,Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach and Vipin Kumar “Introduction to Data Mining”,  
Pearson Education, 2007. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Alex Berson and Stephen J. Smith “Data Warehousing, Data Mining & OLAP”, Tata 
McGraw – Hill Edition, Tenth Reprint 2007. 
2. K.P. Soman, Shyam Diwakar and V. Ajay “Insight into Data mining Theory and 
Practice”, Easter Economy Edition, Prentice Hall of India, 2006. 
3. G. K. Gupta “Introduction to Data Mining with Case Studies”, Easter Economy Edition, 
Prentice Hall of India, 2006. 
 
 
 
SOTT3401h MACHINE LEARNING L  T   P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Prerequisite: Python Programming 
Course Description: 
Machine Learning Fundamentals is an introductory course that provides students with a 
comprehensive understanding of the fundamental concepts, techniques, and applications of 
machine learning. This course aims to equip students with the knowledge and practical skills 
necessary to design, implement, and evaluate machine learning models for various real-world 
tasks. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To introduce students to the core concepts of machine learning, including supervised, 
unsupervised, and reinforcement learning. 
2.   To  provide  a  thorough  understanding  of  key  machine  learning  algorithms  and  their 
underlying mathematical foundations. 
3.   To familiarize students with the process of acquiring, preprocessing, and transforming data 
for machine learning tasks. 
4.   To enable students to evaluate and compare the performance of different machine learning 
models using appropriate metrics. 
5.   To encourage critical thinking by exploring the ethical considerations and limitations of 
machine learning. 
 
UNIT I Introduction to Machine Learning Concepts 9 Hrs 
Introduction to Machine Learning, Types of Machine Learning, Supervise Learning, 
Unsupervised Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Linear Algebra basics, Review of 
Probability Theory, Bias-Variance Trade-off, Noise, Filter, Learning Multiple classes, Model 
Selection & Generalization.  
 
UNIT II Supervised Learning  9 Hrs 
Linear Regression: Linear Basis Function Models, Simple Linear Regression, Multiple Linear 
Regression, Bayesian Linear Regression.  Classification:  Logistic Regression, k
Nearest Neighbors, Decision Trees, Random Forest model, Support Vector Machines, 
Bayesian Networks. 
 
 
UNIT III Unsupervised Learning    9 Hrs  
Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Clustering: 
Introduction to clustering, K-means clustering, K-Mode Clustering, Hierarchal clustering, 
Anomaly Detection, Association: Apriori Algorithm, F-P Growth Algorithm, Eclat Algorithm, 
Ensemble method: Bootstrap Aggregation, Boosting, Gradient Boosting Machines, Stacking. 
 
 
UNIT IV Metrics, Model Evaluation and Reinforcement Learning      9 Hrs 
Evaluation Metrics: Bias-Variance Trade-off, Overfitting and Underfitting, Classification 
Metrics:  Precision, Recall, F1-score, ROC Curve, AUC,  Confusion  Matrix,  Regression 
Metrics:  Mean  Absolute  Error  (MAE),  Mean  Squared  Error  (MSE),  R-squared,  Cross- 
Validation Techniques: K-Fold Cross-Validation, Stratified Cross-Validation, Leave-One-Out 
Cross-Validation (LOOCV),  
 
 
UNIT V Advanced Learning Model      9 Hrs  
Introduction to Reinforcement Learning, Applications of Reinforcement Learning, Q Learning, 
Policy Learning, Case Studies: Recommender System, Sentiment Analysis, Disease Detection. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Understanding of machine learning, different types of machine learning and the basic 
mathematical concepts. 
2.   Demonstrate the different algorithms of supervised learning 
3.   Demonstrate the different algorithms of supervised learning, apply a tool to implement 
typical clustering algorithms for different types of applications. 
4.   Analysis the evaluation parameters involved in machine learning. 
5.   Design and implement various applications using machine learning algorithms. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Introduction to Machine Learning, Ethem Alpaydin, Third Edition, Prentice Hall of 
India, 2015. 
2.   Machine Learning, Tom Mitchell. First Edition, McGraw- Hill, 2017. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Machine Learning, Dr Ruchi Doshi Dr Kamal Kant Hiran, BPB Publications, 2021. 
2.   Machine Learning using Python, Manaranjan Pradhan, U Dinesh Kumar,  Wiley 
Publications, 2019. 
3.   Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective, Kevin P. Murphy, MIT Press, 2012. 
4.   Machine Learning – An Algorithmic Perspective, Stephen Marsland, Second Edition, 
CRC Press, 2014. 
5.   Mathematics for Machine Learning, Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, Cheng Soon 
Ong, Cambridge University Press, 2020. 
SOTT3401i DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AND VECTOR CALCULUS L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Prerequisite: Engineering Mathematics 
Course Description: 
This course introduces the concepts and applications of differentiation and integration of vector 
valued functions, differential equations. The objective of this course is to familiarize the 
prospective engineers with some advanced concepts and methods in Mathematics which 
include the Calculus of vector valued functions, ordinary differential equations which are 
invaluable for any engineer’s mathematical tool box. The topics treated in this course have 
applications in computer science engineering. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1. Enlighten the learners in the concept of differential equations. 
2. Furnish the learners with basic concepts and techniques at plus two level to lead them 
into advanced level by handling various real world applications. 
3. Formulate and solve the higher order differential equation by analyzing physical 
situations. 
4. Find the work done in moving a particle along the path over a force field. Enlighten 
the learners in the concept of vector calculus. 
5. To study about various theorems with applications  
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Linear Differential equations of first order: Introduction, Formation of a differential 
equation, Solutions (Variable separable, Homogeneous and non- Homogeneous), Linear and 
Bernoulli differential equations, Applications (Newton's law of cooling and decay and growth 
rate). 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Linear Differential equations of higher order: Definitions, complete solution, operator D, 
rules for finding complimentary function, inverse operator, rules for finding particular integral, 
method of variation of parameters. 
 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Equations reducible to Linear Differential Equations: Cauchy’s and Legendre’s linear 
equations, simultaneous linear equations with constant coefficients, Applications to L-C-R 
Circuit problems and Mass spring system. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Vector differentiation: Scalar and vector point functions, vector operator del, del applies to 
scalar point functions-Gradient, del applied to vector point functions-Divergence and Curl, 
vector identities. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Vector integration: Line integral-circulation-work done, surface integral-flux, Green’s 
theorem in the plane (without proof), Stoke’s theorem (without proof), volume integral, 
Divergence theorem (without proof) and applications of these theorems. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1. Analyse the solutions of the first order linear differential equations and its applications. 
2. Solve the higher order differential equation by analyzing physical situations. 
3. Identify the essential characteristics of linear differential equations with constant coefficient. 
4. Interpret the physical meaning of different operators such as gradient, curl and divergence. 
5. Estimate the work done against a field, circulation and flux using vector calculus. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.  Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 10/e, John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
2.  B. S. Grewal, “Higher engineering mathematics”, Khanna publishers, New edition. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Dennis G. Zill and Warren S. Wright, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Jones and 
Bartlett, 2011. 
2.  Michael Greenberg, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 2/e, Pearson, 2018. 
3.  B. V. Ramana, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Mc Graw Hill Education. 
SOTT3401j NUMERICAL METHODS FOR ENGINEERS L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Prerequisite: Engineering Mathematics 
 
Course Description: 
This course emphasizes the implementation of numerical methods for computer aided solutions 
to problems that arise in engineering design and analysis. Methods include interpolation, 
extrapolation, curve fitting, and integration and techniques solving non-linear equations, 
systems of linear equations, and differential equations. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1. Be able to numerically solve systems of linear algebraic eqns. 
2. Enlighten the learners in the concept of Interpolation. 
3. Furnish the learners with basic concepts and techniques at plus two level to lead them into 
advanced level by handling various real-world applications. 
4. Apply appropriate numerical methods to solve the problem with most accuracy. 
5. Assess the approximation techniques to formulate and apply appropriate strategy to solve 
real world problems. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Solution of Algebraic and Transcendental Equations: Bisection method, Regula - Falsi 
method, Iterative Method, Newton- Raphson method, Gauss Seidel method. 
 
 
UNIT II     9 Hrs 
Curve Fitting: Principle of Least Squares-Fitting of curves-Fitting of linear, quadratic and 
exponential curves. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Interpolation: Finite differences, symbolic relations, Newton’s forward and backward 
formulae, Gauss central difference formulae, Lagrange’s difference formula. 
 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Numerical Differentiation & Integration: Derivatives using forward & backward difference 
formulae, Trapezoidal rule and Simpson’s 1/3rd and 3/8th rules. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Solutions of Ordinary differential equations: Taylor’s series method, Picard’s method, 
Euler’s and modified Euler’s methods and Runge-Kutta method of fourth order. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Implement numerical methods for a variety of multidisciplinary applications and a 
variety of numerical algorithms using appropriate technology. 
2.   Acquire basic knowledge in solving interpolation with equal interval problems by 
various numerical methods. 
3.   Derive Least – Squares curve fitting procedures, fitting a straight line, fitting a parabola, 
nonlinear curve fitting, Curve fitting by a sum of exponentials. 
4.   Solve the real time problems by using numerical differentiation and integration. 
5.   Find the solution of ordinary differential equation of first order by Euler, Taylor, 
Picard’s and Runge-Kutta methods. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 10/e, John Wiley & Sons, 
2011. 
2.   B. S. Grewal, “Higher engineering mathematics”, Khanna publishers, New edition. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Dennis G. Zill and Warren S. Wright, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Jones 
and Bartlett, 2011. 
2.   Michael Greenberg, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 2/e, Pearson, 2018. 
3.   B. V. Ramana, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Mc Graw Hill Education. 
SOTT3401k  MATHEMATICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CYBER SECURITY L  T  P   C 
3   0  0   3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces different mathematical concepts in cyber security. The cryptographic 
algorithms designed by some mathematical algorithms, to use the different keys. Number 
theory is well versed area in the cyber security. This course studies with strong math 
background to improve Strong analytics skills that needed. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The students will try to learn: 
1. The concepts of number theory and its applications to information security. 
2. The concept of congruences and its basic properties. 
3. The security model and analyze them before being used in many commercial, industrial 
as well as web application. 
4. The knowledge of encryption and decryption techniques and their applications in 
managing the security of data. 
5. The general understanding of cyber security relationship with numbers. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                             9 Hrs. 
Integers, Greatest common divisors and prime Factorization: The well-ordering property- 
Divisibility-Representation of integers-Computer operations with integers-Prime numbers- 
Greatest common divisors-The Euclidean algorithm -The fundamental theorem of arithmetic- 
Factorization of integers and the Fermat Numbers-Linear Diophantine equations 
 
 
UNIT II   9 Hrs. 
Congruences: Introduction to congruences -Linear congruences-The Chinese remainder 
theorem-Systems of linear congruences 
 
 
UNIT III  9 Hrs. 
Applications of Congruences:  Divisibility  tests-The  perpetual  calendar-Round-robin 
tournaments-Computer file storage and hashing functions. Wilson's theorem and Fermat's 
little theorem- Pseudo primes- Euler's theorem- Euler's p hi-function- The sum and number 
of divisors- Perfect numbers and Mersenne primes. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                          9 Hrs. 
Finite fields & Primality, factoring: Finite fields- quadratic residues and reciprocity-Pseudo 
primes-rho method-Fermat factorization and factor bases. 
 
 
UNIT V   9 Hrs. 
Cryptology:  Basic terminology - Character Ciphers - Block Ciphers-Exponentiation ciphers - Public-key cryptography - Discrete Logarithm-Knapsack ciphers - RSA algorithm-Some 
applications to computer science. 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Understand number theory and its properties. 
2.   Understand principles on congruences. 
3.   Develop the knowledge to apply various applications. 
4.   Utilize finite fields, rho method and Fermat factorization. 
5.   Develop various encryption methods and its applications. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Kenneth  H  Rosen  “Elementary  number  theory  and  its  applications”,  AT  &  T 
Information systems & Bell laboratories. 
2.   Neal Koblitz “A course in Number theory & Cryptography”, Springer. 
3.   Niven, H.S. Zuckerman and H. L. Montgomery, “An Introduction to the Theory of 
Numbers”, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Herbert S. Zuckerman, “An Introduction to The Theory of Numbers”, Hugh L. 
Montgomery, Ivan Niven, Wiley publishers 
2.   Tom M Apostol “Introduction to Analytic number theory”, Springer 
3.   V K Krishnan “Elementary number theory”, Universities press 
4.   Leigh  Metcalf,  William  Casey,  “Cybersecurity  and  Applied  Mathematics”, 
Syngress Publisher(s). 
SOTT3401l INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS L T P C 
3  0 0 3 
Course Description: 
This course is to present the scientific support in the field of information search and retrieval. 
This course explores the fundamental relationship between information retrieval, hypermedia 
architectures, and semantic models, thus deploying and testing several important retrieval 
models such as vector space, Boolean and query expansion. It discusses implementation and 
evaluation issues of new algorithms like clustering, pattern searching, and stemming with 
advanced data/file structures, indirectly facilitating a platform to implement comprehensive 
catalogue of information search tools while designing an e-commerce web site. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to, 
1.   Demonstrate genesis and diversity of information retrieval situations for text and hyper 
media. 
2.   Analyze the performance of information retrieval using advanced techniques such as, 
clustering, and regression analysis. 
3.   Describe hands-on experience store, and retrieve information from www using 
semantic approaches. 
4.   Analyze ranked retrieval of a very large number of documents with hyperlinks between 
them. 
5.   Demonstrate Information visualization technologies like Cognition and perception in 
the Internet or Web search engine. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Introduction: Retrieval strategies: vector space model, Probabilistic retrieval strategies: 
Simple term weights, Non binary independence model, Language models. 
 
 
UNIT II                     9 Hrs 
Retrieval Utilities: Relevance feedback, clustering, N-grams, Regression analysis, Thesauri. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Retrieval utilities: Semantic networks, parsing Cross –Language: Information Retrieval: 
Introduction, Crossing the Language barrier. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                         9 Hrs 
Efficiency: Inverted Index, Query processing, Signature files, Duplicate document detection. 
 
 
UNIT  V   9 Hrs 
Integrating structured data and text. A historical progression, Information retrieval as relational 
application, Semi Structured search using a relational schema.  Distributed Information 
Retrieval: A theoretical Model of Distributed retrieval, web search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, the student should be able to, 
1.   Describe models like vector-space, probabilistic and language models to identify the 
similarity of query and document. 
2.   Understand relevance feedback, implement clustering algorithms like hierarchical 
agglomerative clustering and k-means algorithm, illustrate how N-grams are used for 
detection and correction of spelling errors. 
3.   Understand natural language systems to build semantic networks for text, illustrate 
algorithms used for natural language processing. 
4.   Understand the measures to evaluate the performance of cross language information, 
query, document and phrase translation. 
5.   Design the method to build inverted index. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. David A. Grossman, Ophir Frieder, Information Retrieval – Algorithms and 
Heuristics, Springer, 2nd Edition (Distributed by Universal Press), 2004. 
2. Gerald J Kowalski, Mark T Maybury Information Storage and Retrieval Systems: 
Theory and Implementation, Springer, 2004. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Soumen Chakrabarti, Mining the Web: Discovering Knowledge from Hypertext Data, 
Morgan – Kaufmann Publishers, 2002. 
2. Christopher  D  Manning,  Prabhakar  Raghavan,  Hinrich  Schutze,  An  Introduction  to 
Information Retrieval by Cambridge University Press, England, 2009. 
3. Marcia J Bates, Understanding Information Retrieval Systems, CRC Pssress, 2012 
SOTT3401m CRYPTOGRAPHY AND NETWORK SECURITY L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Course Description: 
The aim of this course is to introduce the student to the areas of cryptography and cryptanalysis. 
This course develops a basic understanding of the algorithms used to protect users online and 
to understand some of the design choices behind these algorithms. The course emphasizes to 
give a basic understanding of previous attacks on cryptosystems with the aim of preventing 
future attacks. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand basics of Cryptography and Network Security. 
2. To learn encrypt and decrypt messages using block ciphers. 
3. Understanding existing authentication and key agreement protocols. 
4. Understanding e-mail and file security software, PGP, and efficiently use the code 
to encrypt and sign messages. 
5. Understanding and analysing SSL or Firewall based solutions against security threats, 
employ access control techniques. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Classical Encryption Techniques: Security attacks - Security services and mechanisms - A 
model for Network Security – Classical encryption techniques - Symmetric cipher model - 
Substitution techniques - Caesar Cipher – Mono alphabetic Cipher - Play fair Cipher - Hill 
Cipher - Transposition techniques. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Block Ciphers- Data Encryption Standards and Public Key Cryptography: Simplified 
DES - Block Cipher Principles - DES – AES - Block Cipher Design Principles - Block Cipher 
modes of Operation - Public Key Cryptography - Principles of Public Key Cryptosystems - 
The RSA Algorithm -Diffie Hellman Key Exchange. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Message Authentication Codes - Hash Functions and Digital Signatures: Message 
Authentication Requirements - Message Authentication Functions - Message Authentication 
Codes - Hash Functions - Security of Hash Functions and MACs - Hash algorithms – SHA – 
HMAC - Digital Signatures -Digital Signature Standard (DSS) - Authentication applications – 
Kerberos - X.509 Authentication Service. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Electronic Mail and IP Security: Pretty good privacy - S/MIME - IPsec overview – 
architecture - Authentication Header and Encapsulating security pay load - combining security 
associates. 
UNIT V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Web Security-Intruders-Firewalls: Web security considerations - Secure socket layer and 
transport layer security - Secure electronic transaction - Intruders - Intrusion detection - 
Password management - Firewall design and principles - Trusted systems. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course the student: 
1. Identify computer and network security threats, classify the threats and develop a 
security model to prevent, detect and recover from the attacks. 
2. Able to encrypt and decrypt the messages. 
3. Analyze and compare the existing authentication codes and key agreement protocols. 
4. Apply e-mail and file security software’s. 
5. Analyze  different  attacks  on  networks  and  evaluate  the  performance  of  security 
protocols like SSL, TLS and firewalls. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practices,8/e, William Stallings, 
Global Edition, 2023, Pearson Education. 
2. Network Security and Cryptography, 1/e, Bernard Menezes, 2010, Thomson Press 
Ltd, USA. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Principles and Practices of Information Security,4/e, Michal E. Whitman and 
Herbert J. Mattord, 2012, Cengage Learning, New Delhi. 
2. Network Security Essentials (Applications and Standards), 4/e, William Stallings 
Pearson Education. 
3. Hack Proofing your network , 2/e ,Ryan Russell, Dan Kaminsky, Rain Forest 
Puppy, Joe Grand, David Ahmad, Hal Flynn IdoDubrawsky, Steve W.Manzuik and 
Ryan Permeh, wiley Dreamtech, 2002. 
4. Fundamentals of Network Security, 1/e, Eric Maiwald (Dreamtech press) ,2008. 
5. Network Security - Private Communication in a Public World,2/e, Charlie 
Kaufman, Radia Perlman and Mike Speciner,2002, Pearson/PHI. 
SOTT3401n         PRINCIPLES OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES              L   T     P   C 
3 0 0 3 
 
 
Prerequisites 
1. A course on “Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science” 
2. A course on “Computer Programming and Data Structures” 
 
 
Course Description: 
This course presents examples of important programming languages and paradigms such as 
LISP, ALGOL, JAVA, C# and C++. Students write sample programs in some of the languages 
studied. The languages are used to illustrate programming language constructs such as binding, 
binding times, data types and implementation, operations (assignment data-type creation, 
pattern matching), data control, storage management, parameter passing, and operating 
environment. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Introduce important paradigms of programming languages 
2. To provide conceptual understanding of high-level language design and 
implementation 
3. Topics include programming paradigms; syntax and semantics; data types, 
expressions and statements; subprograms and blocks; abstract data types; 
concurrency; functional and logic programming languages; and scripting 
languages 
4. To analyse the concept of concurrency and exceptional handling mechanism. 
5. To introduce the power of Functional Programming Languages. 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Preliminary  Concepts:  Reasons  for  Studying  Concepts  of  Programming  Languages, 
Programming  Domains,  Language  Evaluation  Criteria,  Influences  on  Language  Design, 
Language Categories, Language Design Trade-Offs, Implementation Methods, Programming 
Environments Syntax and Semantics: General Problem of Describing Syntax and Semantics, 
Formal Methods of Describing Syntax, Attribute Grammars, Describing the Meanings of 
Programs 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Names, Bindings, and Scopes: Introduction, Names, Variables, Concept of Binding, Scope, 
Scope and Lifetime, Referencing Environments, Named Constants 
Data Types: Introduction, Primitive Data Types, Character String Types, User Defined 
Ordinal Types, Array, Associative Arrays, Record, Union, Tuple Types, List Types, Pointer 
and Reference Types, Type Checking, Strong Typing, Type Equivalence 
Expressions and Statements: Arithmetic Expressions, Overloaded Operators, Type 
Conversions, Relational and Boolean Expressions, Short Circuit Evaluation, Assignment 
Statements, Mixed-Mode Assignment Control Structures: Introduction, Selection Statements, 
Iterative Statements, Unconditional Branching, Guarded Commands. 
 
 
  
UNIT III                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Subprograms and Blocks: Fundamentals of Sub-Programs, Design Issues for Subprograms, 
Local   Referencing   Environments,  Parameter   Passing   Methods,   Parameters   that   Are 
Subprograms, Calling Subprograms Indirectly, Overloaded Subprograms, Generic 
Subprograms, Design Issues for Functions, User Defined Overloaded Operators, Closures, 
Coroutines 
Implementing Subprograms: General Semantics of Calls and Returns, Implementing Simple 
Subprograms, Implementing Subprograms with Stack-Dynamic Local Variables, Nested 
Subprograms, Blocks, Implementing Dynamic Scoping 
Abstract Data Types: The Concept of Abstraction, Introductions to Data Abstraction, Design 
Issues, Language Examples, Parameterized ADT, Encapsulation Constructs, Naming 
Encapsulations 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Concurrency: Introduction, Introduction to Subprogram Level Concurrency, Semaphores, 
Monitors, Message Passing, Java Threads, Concurrency in Function Languages, Statement 
Level Concurrency.   
Exception Handling and Event Handling:  Introduction, Exception Handling in Ada, C++, 
Java, Introduction to Event Handling, Event Handling with Java and C#. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Functional Programming Languages: Introduction, Mathematical Functions, Fundamentals 
of Functional Programming Language, LISP, Support for Functional Programming in Primarily 
Imperative Languages, Comparison of Functional and Imperative Languages 
Logic Programming Language: Introduction, an Overview of Logic Programming, Basic 
Elements of Prolog, Applications of Logic Programming. Scripting Language: Pragmatics, Key 
Concepts, Case Study: Python – Values and Types, Variables, Storage and Control, Bindings 
and Scope, Procedural Abstraction, Data Abstraction, Separate Compilation, Module Library. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Acquire the skills for expressing syntax and semantics in formal notation 
2.   Identify and apply a suitable programming paradigm for a given computing application 
3.   Gain knowledge of and able to compare the features of various programming languages 
4.   Gain knowledge regarding how to handle exceptions in different programming languages. 
5.   To get knowledge  in  Functional  Programming  Languages  and  Logic  Programming 
Languages 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Concepts of Programming Languages Robert. W. Sebesta 10/E, Pearson Education. 
2.   Programming Language Design Concepts, D. A. Watt, Wiley Dreamtech, 2007. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Programming Languages, 2nd Edition, A.B. Tucker, R. E. Noonan,TMH. 
2. Programming Languages, K. C. Louden, 2nd Edition, Thomson, 2003 
SOTT3401o UNIX AND SHELL PROGRAMMING L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Prerequisite: Operating Systems 
Course Description: 
This course provides an in-depth exploration of the Unix operating system and its command- 
line environment. We will gain hands-on experience in utilizing Unix commands, 
understanding shell scripting, and working with various Unix shells and develop a strong 
foundation in Unix fundamentals and the essential skills needed to navigate, manage files, write 
scripts, and perform system tasks efficiently. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Able to understand the fundamental concept of Unix. 
2.   Able to understand the fundamental concept of Shell. 
3.   Develop skills to design regular expression feature with Grep, Sed and AWK. 
4.   Inculcate skill on korn shell features for construct Korn shell programming for the given 
task. 
5.   Develop skill to apply various UNIX system calls in designing different UNIX utilities. 
 
 
UNIT I Introduction to UNIX 9 Hrs 
The UNIX Architecture - Features of UNIX - Internal And External Commands - Command 
Structure, Accessing Unix, Date, Calculator, Change Password, Listing Directories and Files, 
Who Are You, Creating Files, Editing Files, Display Content of a File, Counting Words in a 
File,  Copying  Files,  Renaming  Files,  Deleting  Files,  Unix  Directories,  Creating  Parent 
Directories, Changing Directories, Renaming Directories, Unix File Permission, Changing 
Owners and Groups, Mount and unmount, Arieve Operation, Networking Commands. 
 
 
UNIT II Overview of Shells 9 Hrs 
Unix Session, Standard Streams, Redirection, Pipes, Tee Command, Command Execution, 
Command-Line Editing, Quotes, Command Substitution, Job Control, Aliases, Variables, 
Predefined Variables, Shell Environment, Customization 
Filters: Introduction, Concatenating files, Display Beginning and End of files, Sorting, 
Translating Characters, Ordering a File, uniq. 
 
 
UNIT III Regular Expressions and Functions 9 Hrs 
Atoms: operators GREP, Operations, grep Family, Searching for File Content, SED: Scripts, 
Operations, Addresses, Applications, grep and sed, AWK: Execution, Fields and Records, 
Operations,  Patterns,  Actions,  Associative  Arrays,  String  Functions,  String  Functions, 
Mathematical Functions, User Defined Functions, awk and grep, sed and awk. 
 
 
UNIT IV Interactive Korn Shell 9 Hrs 
Introduction, Korn Shell Features, Two Special Files, Variables, Exit Status of a Command, 
eval  Command,  Environmental  Variables,  Options,  Startup  Scripts,  Command  History, 
Command Execution Process, Basic Script concepts, Expressions, Decisions Making Scripts, 
Repetition,  special  Parameters and  Variables,  changing  Positional  Parameters, Argument 
Validation, Debugging Scripts, Script Examples. 
 
 
UNIT V Interactive C Shell and Communications 9 Hrs 
C shell features, Two Special Files, Variables, Output, Input, Exit Status of a Command, eval 
Command, Environmental Variables, On-Off  Variables,  Startup  and  Shutdown  Scripts, 
Command History, Command Execution Scripts, Fundamentals of C Shell Programming, 
Communications, Email. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Demonstrate knowledge on fundamentals of UNIX operating system, Analyze Unix 
general purpose, file handling and Networking commands and utilities. 
2.   Review and identify various features of Unix shell. 
3.   Apply Regular Expressions to search and manipulate text data in Unix files using tools 
like grep, sed, and awk. 
4.   Demonstrate Shell Knowledge of different Unix shells, including the Korn shell and C 
shell, and their distinctive features. 
5.   Design Functional scripts with decision-making structures, loops, user-defined functions, 
and error handling. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Unix and shell Programming, Behrouz A. Forouzan and Richard F. Gilbery, 1st Edition, 
Cengage Learning India, 2003. 
2.   Unix Concepts and Applications, Sumitabha Das, 4th Edition, TMH, 2006 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Unix Shell programming, Yashwanth Kanitkar, 1st Edition, BPB Publisher, 2010. 
2.   Advanced Unix programming, N.B Venkateswarlu, 2nd Edition, BS Publications, 2010. 
3.   Unix for programmers and users, Graham Glass, King Ables, 3rd Edition, Pearson 
Education, 2008. 
 
SOTT3401p INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGY L T  P C 
  3 0  0 3 
 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to the fundamental principles of psychology and explores the 
psychological processes underlying human behaviour and cognition. The course will 
emphasize the relevance of psychological concepts to the field of Computer Science. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1.   Understand the key concepts and historical foundations of psychology. 
2. Describe the biological foundations of behavior and their relevance to cognitive 
processes. 
3.   Apply psychological principles to real-world scenarios in technology and Computer 
Science. 
4.   Analyze and interpret basic research in psychology. 
5.   Recognize the impact of psychological factors on individual well-being and interactions 
with technology. 
 
 
UNIT 1                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Introduction to Psychology, Definition and scope of psychology, Historical perspectives in 
psychology, Major branches of psychology, Careers in psychology and their relevance to 
Computer Science. 
 
 
UNIT 2    9 Hrs 
Research Methods and Ethics, Scientific method in psychology, Experimental, correlation, and 
observational  research,  Ethical  considerations  in  psychological  research,  Pseudoscience, 
critical thinking, and evaluating online information. 
 
 
UNIT 3 9 Hrs 
Biological Foundations of Behavior, Neurons and the nervous system, Brain structure and 
function,  neural  communication  and  neurotransmitters, Impact  of biology  on  perception, 
memory, and decision-making. 
 
 
UNIT 4 9 Hrs 
Learning and Memory, Classical and operant conditioning, Cognitive processes in learning and 
memory, Different types of memory and factors affecting memory retention, Strategies for 
improving learning and memory (relevant to programming), Cognitive Processes and Problem 
Solving, Information processing model, Attention, memory, and decision making, Problem 
solving, decision making, and critical thinking skills, Application of cognitive psychology to 
debugging and algorithm design. 
UNIT 5 9 Hrs 
Social  Psychology,  Social  influence:  conformity,  obedience,  and  compliance,  Attitudes, 
persuasion, and social cognition, Group dynamics and collaboration in virtual environments, 
Online identity, self-presentation, and social media psychology, Mental Health and Stress 
Management, Common mental health disorders and their prevalence, Stress, coping strategies, 
and mental resilience, Digital well-being and managing technology-related stress, Resources 
for mental health support in the tech industry. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1.   Student can demonstrate knowledge of key psychological concepts, theories, and 
historical developments. 
2.   Apply psychological principles to analyze human behavior, cognition, and interactions 
with technology. 
3.   Interpret and critically evaluate psychological research and its implications. 
4.   Communicate effectively about psychological concepts in written and verbal forms. 
5.   Recognize the importance of mental well-being and ethical considerations in 
technology-related contexts. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Wade, C. & Tavris, C. (1999) Invitation to psychology.  New York:  Longman. 
2. Coon,  Dennis.  Introduction to Psychology:  Exploration and Application (seventh 
edition). Minneapolis/St. Paul: West Publishing Company, 1995. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   "Psychology" by David G. Myers 
2.   "Introduction to Psychology" by James W. Kalat 
3.   "Psychology: Themes and Variations" by Wayne Weiten 
SOTT3401q Industry 4.0  L T P C 
 3  0  0 3 
Pre-requisite : Nil 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand Industry 4.0  
2. Apply IoT and IIoT for Industry 4.0  
3. Understand CPS for Industry 4.0 
4. Understand the process of information sharing in Cloud environment 
5. To study the various case studies of IOT 4.0  
UNIT I  9 Hrs 
INDUSTRY 4.0- Introduction to Industry 4.0 The Various Industrial Revolutions - 
Digitalization and the Networked Economy - Drivers, Enablers, Compelling Forces and 
Challenges for Industry 4.0 - Comparison of Industry 4.0 Factory and Today's Factory - 
Trends of Industrial Big Data and Predictive Analytics for Smart Business 
Transformation  
UNIT II  9 Hrs 
Road to Industry 4.0 - Internet of Things (IoT) & Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) & 
Internet of Services - Smart Manufacturing - Smart Devices and Products - Smart 
Logistics - Smart Cities Predictive Analytics  
UNIT III  9 Hrs 
Tentative System, Technologies for enabling Industry 4.0–Cyber Physical Systems - 
Robotic Automation and Collaborative Robots - Support System for Industry 4.0 - 
Mobile Computing - Cyber Security  
UNIT IV  9 Hrs 
Role of data, information, knowledge and collaboration in future organizations - 
Resource- based view of a firm - Data as a new resource for organizations - Harnessing 
and sharing knowledge in organizations - Cloud Computing Basics -Cloud Computing 
and Industry 4.0  
UNIT V  9 Hrs 
Industry 4.0 IIoT case studies - Opportunities and Challenges - Future of Works and 
Skills for Workers in the Industry 4.0 Era - Strategies for competing in an Industry 4.0 
world – Society 5.0 
  
Course Outcomes: 
  By the end of this course, students should be able to:  
1. Use Industry 4.0 for Industrial Applications  
2. Use IOT and IIOT for Industry 4.0  
3. Apply smart devices Industrial Applications 
4. Understand the various supporting technologies for IOT 
5. Apply IIOT to various applications  
TEXT BOOKS  
1. Alasdair Gilchrist, Industry 4.0: The Industrial Internet of Things  
2. Arsheep Bahga, Internet of Things: A Hands-On Approach 
SOTT3401r COMPUTER VISION L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Course Description: 
Computer vision is a field of artificial intelligence (AI) that enables computing systems to 
extract meaningful information from digital images, videos, and other visual inputs to make 
computable decisions. This course aims to provide a comprehensive overview of computer 
vision. This course emphasizes computer vision principles and highlights their application in 
the real world. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Review image processing techniques for computer vision. 
2.   Understand shape and region analysis. 
3.   Understand Hough Transform and its applications to detect lines, circles, ellipses. 
4.   Implement three-dimensional image analysis techniques. 
5.   Design some applications using computer vision algorithms 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Introduction: Image Processing - Computer vision and computer graphics - What is computer 
vision - Low-level, Midlevel, High-level - Overview of diverse computer vision applications: 
Document image analysis - Biometrics - Object recognition - Tracking - Medical image 
analysis - Content-based image retrieval - Video data processing - Multimedia - Virtual reality 
and augmented reality. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Image Formation Models: Monocular imaging system - Radiosity: The Physics ‘of image 
formation - Radiance, Irradiance, BRDF, colour etc. - Orthographic and perspective projection - Camera model and camera calibration – Binocular imaging systems - Multiple views 
geometry - Structure determination - Shape from shading - Photometric Stereo - Depth from 
defocus - Construction of 3D model from images. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Image Processing and Motion Estimation: Image preprocessing - Image representations 
(continuous and discrete) - Edge detection. 
Regularization theory - Optical computation - Stereo Vision - Motion estimation - Structure 
from motion. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Shape Representation and Segmentation :  Contour based representation - Region based 
representation - Deformable curves and surfaces - Snakes and active contours - Level set 
representations - Fourier and wavelet descriptors – Medial representations - Multiresolution 
analysis. 
 
  
UNIT V  9 Hrs 
Object Recognition and Image Understanding : Hough transforms and other simple object 
recognition methods - Shape correspondence and shape matching - Principal Component 
Analysis - Shape priors for recognition - Pattern recognition methods - HMM, GMM and EM - Application: Surveillance – Foreground background separation – Particle filters – Chamfer 
matching, tracking, and occlusion – Combining views from multiple cameras – Human gait 
analysis - Applications: In-vehicle vision system: Locating roadway – Road markings – 
Identifying road signs – Locating pedestrians. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of this course, students will be able to: 
1.   Understand the image processing techniques for computer vision. 
2.   Analyse the shape and region analysis techniques for computer vision. 
3.   Analyse the Hough Transform and its applications to detect lines, circles, ellipses. 
4.   Implement the concept of three-dimensional image analysis techniques. 
5.   Develop some applications with the help of various computer vision algorithms 
 
 
Text Books 
1. David A. Forsyth, Jean Ponce, ‖Computer Vision: A Modern Approach‖, 2nd Edition, 
Pearson 
Education Limited, 2015 
2. E. Trucco and A. Verri, ―Introductory Techniques for 3D Computer Vision‖, Prentice Hall, 
1998. 
 
 
Reference Books 
1.   Mark Nixon and Alberto S. Aquado, ―Feature Extraction and Image Processing for 
Computer 
2.   Vision‖, 3rd Edition, Academic Press, 2012. 
3.   E. R. Davies, ―Computer and Machine Vision‖, 4th Edition, Academic Press, 2012. 
4.   Richard Szeliski, ―Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications (CVAA)‖, Springer, 
2010. 
5.   Simon J. D. Prince, ―Computer Vision: Models, Learning, and Inference‖, Cambridge 
University. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Elective -I 
BTST3601a Data Privacy L  T  P  
C 3   0  0   3 
Course Description: This course aims to help you become a better decision maker around 
data-sharing practices. You will explore data privacy ethics and principles, the risks of data 
collection and surveillance, and the need for data privacy policy, advocacy, and monitoring. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students 
to: 
1. Create architectural, algorithmic and technological foundations for the 
maintenance of the privacy of individuals. 
2. Students are able to learn the concepts of confidentiality of organizations, and the 
protection of sensitive information, despite the requirement that information be 
released publicly or semi- publicly. 
3. To learn various privacy models 
4. To Understand the function of various computation system 
5. Identify privacy implications of modern digital technology 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                               9 
Hrs Introduction- Fundamental Concepts, Definitions, Statistics, Data Privacy Attacks, 
Data linking and profiling, access c o n t r o l m o d e l s , role-based access control, privacy 
policies, their specifications, languages and  implementation, privacy  policy languages,  
privacy in different domains- medical, 
financial, 
etc.   
UNIT II                                                                                                                              9 
Hrs Data explosion- Statistics and Lack of barriers in Collection and Distribution of 
Person- specific information, Mathematical model for characterizing and comparing real
world data sharing practices and policies and for computing privacy and risk 
measurements, Demographics and Uniqueness, 
Protection Models- Null-map, k-map, Wrong map   
UNIT III 9 
Hrs Survey of techniques- Protection models (null-map, k-map, wrong map), Disclosure 
control, Inferring entity identities, Strength and weaknesses of techniques, entry specific 
databases.   
UNIT IV                                                                                                                            9 
Hrs Computation systems for protecting delimited data- MinGen, Datafly, Mu-Argus, 
k- Similar, Protecting textual documents: Scrub.   
UNIT V       9 
Hrs Technology, Policy, Privacy and Freedom- Medical privacy legislation, policies and 
best practices, Examination of privacy matters specific to the World Wide Web, 
Protections provided by the Freedom of Information Act or the requirement for search 
warrants. 
 
 
 
 
 
Course 
outcomes: 
1. Discuss the concepts of privacy in today’s environment. 
2. How automation is changing the concepts and expectations concerning privacy 
and the increasingly interconnected issue of security. 
3. Explain the knowledge of the role of private regulatory and self-help efforts. 
4. How emerging issues are affecting society and business, with a concentration 
on how information security must shape corporate practices. 
5. Familiarized with various policy in data privacy  
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. B.   Raghunathan,  The   Complete   Book   of   Data   Anonymization:   From   
Planning to Implementation, 1st Edition, Auerbach Pub, 2013. 
2. L. Sweeney, Computational Disclosure Control: A Primer on Data Privacy 
Protection, MIT Computer Science, 2002. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Nishant Bhajaria Data Privacy: A runbook for engineers, Manning Publications. 
2. Gwen Kennedy, Data Privacy Law: A Practical Guide to the GDPR, ISBN-13: 
978-0999512722, ISBN-10: 0999512722. 
BTST3601b DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Course Description: 
This course covers general introductory concepts in the design and implementation of 
distributed systems. It covers scheduling in multiprocessors, memory hierarchies, 
synchronization, concurrency control, fault tolerance, data-parallel programming models, 
scalability studies, distributed memory message passing systems, shared memory 
programming models, tasks, dependence graphs, and program transformations, parallel I/O, 
applications, tools. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1.   To gain knowledge in the design of distributed systems 
2.   To explore the algorithms that support distributed computing. 
3. To provide practical exposure to the design 
4.   To provide knowledge of the functioning of existing distributed systems 
5.   To unveil the basic concepts of fault tolerance systems 
 
 
UNIT I  9 Hrs 
Fundamentals of distributed systems: Introduction to Distributed Computing System- 
Evolution of Distributed Computing  Systems-Distributed  Computing  System  Models  - 
Gaining Popularity of Distributed Computing Systems-Distributed Operating System- Issues 
in  Designing  a  Distributed  Operating  System-  Introduction  to  Distributed  Computing 
Environment (DCE) 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Communication in distributed systems : Message Passing- Introduction- Desirable Features 
of a Good Message-Passing System - Issues in IPC by Message Passing - Synchronization- 
Buffering- Multidatagram Messages - Encoding and Decoding of Message Data - Process 
Addressing - Failure Handling 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Memory  and  synchronization:  General  Architecture  of  DSM  Systems  -  Design  and 
Implementation  Issues  of  DSM  –  Granularity  -  Structure  of  Shared  Memory  Space  - 
Replacement Strategy – Thrashing - Other Approaches to DSM - Heterogeneous DSM - 
Advantages of DSM - Advantages of DSM - Event Ordering - Mutual Exclusion – Deadlock - 
Election Algorithms 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Resource,  process  management  and  naming:  Desirable  Features  of  a  Good  Global 
Scheduling Algorithm - Task Assignment Approach – Load Balancing Approach - Load- 
Sharing Approach - Process Migration - Threads - Desirable Features of a Good Naming 
System - Fundamental Terminologies and Concepts  - System-Oriented  Names - Object- 
Locating Mechanisms - Human-Oriented Names - Name Caches - Naming and Security 
UNIT V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Distributed file systems and security: Desirable Features of a Good Distributed File System - File Models - File-Accessing Models – File Sharing Semantics - File-Caching Schemes - File 
Replication - Fault Tolerance - Atomic Transactions - Design Principles - Potential Attacks to 
Computer Systems 
 
 
Course outcomes: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Know the design of distributed systems 
2. Understand and implement the algorithms of distributed systems 
3. Illustrate principles and importance of distributed operating system 
4. Implement distributed client-server applications using remote method invocation 
5. Distinguish between centralized systems and distributed systems. Get exposed to the fault 
tolerant systems 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Pradeep K. Sinha, “Distributed Operating Systems Concepts and Design”, PHI, 2007 
2.   Hwang, K., Dongarra, J., & Fox, G. C. (2013). Distributed and cloud computing: from 
parallel processing to the internet of things. Morgan kaufmann. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Andrew S. Tannenbaum, Maarten Van Steen, “Distributed Systems- Principles and 
Paradigms” , Second Edition, PHI, 2007 
2.   Le, D. N., Kumar, R., Mishra, B. K., Chatterjee, J. M., & Khari, M. (Eds.). (2019). Cyber 
Security in Parallel and Distributed Computing: Concepts, Techniques, Applications and 
Case Studies. John Wiley & Sons. 
3.   Chen, C., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., Wan, S., & Pei, Q. (2021). Distributed computation 
offloading method based on deep reinforcement learning in ICV. Applied Soft 
Computing, 103, 107108. 
BTST3601c ADVANCED JAVA PROGRAMMING L  T  P  C 
 
3   0  0   3 
 
Course Description 
This course has been introduced to make students to focus on advance programming concepts 
of Java Language. This course also provides opportunities to familiarizes various tools and 
techniques. The concepts like Java Servlets, JSP, EJB and Spring Framework. 
 
 
Course Objectives 
 
1. To introduce the basics of enterprise architecture models and session tracking. 
2. To understand JSP and to write custom tags. 
3. To impart knowledge on the development of Enterprise Java Beans and advanced Java 
       programming concepts. 
4. To analyse the EJB Middleware Architecture, relationships and EJB container services. 
5. To apply Spring Framework and Hibernate and its mapping. 
 
UNIT I: Introduction And Database Programming                                             9 Hrs 
J2EE Platform – Enterprise architecture styles – J2EE run times – J2EE API – J2EE 
architecture – Containers – Introduction to J2EE technologies – Naming and directory services. 
Database programming with JDBC – JDBC/ODBC bridge – Establishing a connection – 
Creating and executing SQL statements – Querying – Report statements – Scrollable and 
updatable result sets – Java.Sql packages – JDBC data sources – Connection pooling. 
 
 
UNIT II: Servlet Programming 9 Hrs 
Introduction to Servlet Programming - Servlet implementations - Servlet configuration – 
Servlet exceptions - Servlet life cycle - Servlet programming - Servlet security- Servlet 
communication -Advanced servlets: Approach to session tracking- Demonstrating session - 
Lifecycle with cookies – A simple shopping cart using sessions - Servlet context interface - 
Servlet collaboration. 
 
 
UNIT III: JSP and Java Mail                                                                                9 Hrs 
Java Server Pages: Intro to JSP - JSP directives - Scripting elements - Standard auctions – 
Implicit objects - Scope - JSP pages as XML documents - JSP sample program - Design 
strategies - JSP tag Extensions-A simple TAG - Writing TAG extensions. Java Mail API: 
Introduction to java mail – Mail protocols- Java mail overview- Quick, Send me a Email: An 
example program. 
 
 
UNIT IV: Enterprise Java Beans 9 Hrs 
Overview of EJB-EJB Middleware Architecture - EJB architecture- EJB containers and its 
services - Design of EJB tier - Session java beans- Stateless and stateful beans, Entity beans 
and  persistence  -  Container  Vs  bean  managed  persistence,  Message  driven  bean  - 
Relationships, EJB container services. 
UNIT V: Spring Framework 9 Hrs 
Introduction to Spring - spring framework architecture - Spring MVC-Spring ORM - IOC 
container - Spring event handling - Introduction to Hibernate - Spring JDBC - Hibernate 
mappings - Spring MVC web framework - Spring AOP framework. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
On completion of the course, student will be able to 
1.   Understand the concept of JDBC connectivity. 
2.   Analyse the fundamental concept of servlets. 
3.   Apply the concept of JSP and Java Mail. 
4.   Implement Java, J2EE applications using Spring framework. 
5.   Develop enterprise java applications thereby meeting the industrial requirements. 
 
 
Text Books 
1.   Subrahmanyam Allamaraju and Cedric Buest, Professional Java Server Programming J2EE 
Edition‖, Apress, 2007. 
2.   Jim Keogh, Completer Reference, J2EE‖, Tata McGraw Hill, 2007. 
 
 
Reference Books 
1.   James Holmes-Struts, The complete Reference‖, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2007. 
2.   Rod Johnson et al, ―Professional Java Development with the Spring Framework‖, John 
Wiley and Sons, 2005. 
BTST3601d MALWARE ANALYSIS L  T  P  C 
3   0   0   3 
Prerequisite: Nil 
Course Description: 
This course provides the intersection of malware analysis and data science, equipping the 
knowledge and skills to analyse malware through a data-driven approach. We will learn to 
leverage data science techniques to analyse and detect malware, visualize trends, and develop 
machine learning-based detectors and will gain insight into the static and dynamic analysis of 
malware, network analysis, machine learning algorithms, and visualization tools, culminating 
in the implementation of a neural network-based malware detector. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand  Malware  Analysis  Fundamentals  including  static  and  dynamic  
analysis techniques, and the intricacies of malware networks. 
2. Learn how to  apply data science methodologies to malware analysis, including 
data visualization, shared code analysis, and building machine learning models. 
3. Acquire the skills to build and evaluate machine learning-based malware detectors 
using various algorithms and techniques. 
4. Learn to work with malware datasets, visualize trends using data visualization 
libraries, and interpret insights from the visualized data. 
5. Implement a neural network-based malware similarity search engine and detector 
system, showcasing the integration of advanced techniques in real-world scenarios. 
 
 
UNIT I Basis of Static and Dynamic Malware Analysis 9 Hrs 
 
MS-Windows portable executable format, Examining Malware Images and Strings, Basis of 
x86 Assembly Language, Features that limit static analysis, Dynamic Analysis for Malware 
Data Science, Basic Tools for Dynamic Analysis and Limitations. 
 
 
UNIT II Malware Networks and Shared Code Analysis 9 Hrs 
Nodes and Edges, Biportile Networks, Visualizing Malware Networks, Building Malware 
Networks, Jaccard Index to Quantify Similarity, Evaluate Malware, Building a similarity 
graph, Similarity Comparisons. 
 
 
UNIT III Machine Learning based Malware Detectors 9 Hrs 
Procedure  for  Building  a machine  learning  based  detectors,  Types  of  machine  learning 
algorithms, Evaluating malware detection systems, Building a toy decision tree based detector, 
Detector Performance. 
 
 
UNIT IV Visualizing Malware Trends 9 Hrs 
Understanding Malware Datasets, Working with Dataset, Visualizing data using Matplotlib 
and Seaborn. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT V Neural Networks Malware Detector 9 Hrs 
Model Architecture, Training the model, Evaluating the Model, Data Science Tools for 
malware analysis. Case Study: Implement malware similarity search engine and detector 
system. 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Demonstrating an understanding of their internal structures. 
2.   Apply Data Science tools to analyse malware networks, quantify similarity, and visualize 
trends in malware datasets. 
3.   Develop machine learning-based malware detectors using various algorithms and 
evaluate their performance. 
4.   Visualize and interpret trends and patterns in malware data, deriving meaningful insights. 
5.   Implement a neural network-based malware similarity search engine and detector system, 
showcasing practical application. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Malware Data Science:  Attack Detection and Attribution, Joshua Saxe and Hillary 
Sanders, No Starch Press, 2018. 
2.   Practical Malware Analysis: The Hands-On Guide to Dissecting Malicious Software, 
Michael Sikorski, 1st Edition, No Starch Press US, 2012 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Malware Analysis and Detection Engineering: A Comprehensive Approach to Detect and 
Analyze Modern Malware, Abhijit Mohanta and Anoop Saldanha, Apress, 2020. 
2.   Management in der Malware, Sebastian Kexel, Grin Verlag, 2011, German Version. 
BTST3601e DATABASE SECURITY L  T  P  C 
3   0  0   3 
Course Description: 
Database security concerns the use of a broad range of information security controls to protect 
databases (potentially including the data, the database applications or stored functions, the 
database systems, the database servers and the associated network links) against compromises 
of their confidentiality, integrity and availability. It involves various types or categories of 
controls, such as technical, procedural/administrative and physical. Database security is a 
specialist topic within the broader realms of computer security information security and risk 
management. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To learn the security of databases 
2.   To learn the design techniques of database security 
3.   To learn the secure software design 
4.   To analyse Statistical Database Protection & Intrusion Detection Systems 
5.   To understand models for the Protection of new Generation Database Systems 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Introduction: Introduction to Databases Security Problems in Databases, Security Controls 
Conclusions. Security Models –1: Introduction Access Matrix Model, Take-Grant Model, 
Acten Model, PN Model, Hartson and Hsiao's Model, Fernandez's Model, Bussolati and 
Martella's Model for Distributed databases. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Security Models -2: Bell and LaPadula's Model, Biba's Model, Dion's Model, Sea View 
Model, Jajodia and Sandhu's Model. The Lattice Model for the Flow Control conclusion. 
Security Mechanisms: Introduction User Identification/Authentication, Memory Protection, 
Resource Protection Control Flow Mechanisms. Isolation Security Functionalities in Some 
Operating Systems, Trusted Computer System, Evaluation Criteria. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Security Software Design: Introduction, A Methodological Approach to Security Software, 
Design Secure Operating System, Design Secure DBMS, Design Security Packages, Database 
Security  Design.  Statistical  Database  Protection  &  Intrusion  Detection  Systems: 
Introduction  Statistics  Concepts  and  Definitions,  Types  of  Attacks,  Inference  Controls 
evaluation, Criteria for Control Comparison. Introduction IDES System, RETISS System, 
ASES System Discovery. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Models for the Protection of new Generation Database Systems -1: Introduction, A Model 
for the Protection of Frame Based Systems, A Model for the Protection of Object Oriented 
Systems, SORION Model for the Protection of Object-Oriented Databases. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Models for the protection of new Generation Database Systems -2: The Orion Model, 
Jajodia and Kogan's Model, A Model for the Protection of Active Databases Conclusions. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Able to explain various security models. 
2.   Able to analyze and apply security mechanisms. 
3.   Able to design and implement secure database systems. 
4.   Able to identify security threats in database systems. 
5.   Able to solve complex problems in a database system by using protection models. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Database  Security  and  Auditing,  Hassan  A.  Afyouni,  India  Edition,  CENGAGE 
Learning, 2009. 
2.   Database Security, Castano, Second edition, Pearson Education. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Database security by alfred basta, melissa zgola, CENGAGE learning 
BTSL3501                          Artificial Intelligence Lab  L T P C 
   0  0  2 1 
PRE-REQUISITES:  A course on Programming with Python  
Course Description:  
COURSE OBJECTIVES:  
1. To understand the methods for implementing algorithms using artificial intelligence 
techniques. 
2. To explore different algorithms for solving real-world problems.  
3. To practice and implement various local search algorithms.  
4. To understand different informed search strategies.  
5. To learn the robotics concepts.  
List of Experiments:  
1. Write a Program to Implement Breadth First Search.  
2.  Write a Program to Implement Depth First Search.  
3.  Write a Program to Implement 8-Puzzle problem.  
4. Write a Program to Implement Water-Jug problem.  
5. Write a Program to find the solution for Wumpus world problem.  
6. Write a Program to Implement Simulated Annealing algorithm.  
7. Write a Program to Implement Travelling Salesman Problem using Python. 
8. Write a Program to Implement A* Algorithm.  
9. Write a Program to Implement Hill Climbing Algorithm.  
10. Write a Program to Implement text analysis using NLTK.  
11. Develop a robotic simulation using VEX.  
COURSE OUTCOMES:  
1. Understand the different searching algorithms for solving problems. 
2. Analyse and identify the problem-solving techniques 
3. Design and develop various algorithms for solving real world problems 
4. Understand and demonstrate various local search algorithms. 
5. Understand the robot functions through simulation. 
REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1. Stuart Russell, Peter Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach”, 4th 
Edition, Pearson Education, 2020.  
2. Wolfgang Ertel, “Introduction to Artificial Intelligence”, 2nd Edition, Springer 
International Publishing, 2017. 
3. Stephen Lucci, Danny Kopec, “Artificial Intelligence in the 21st Century”, Mercury 
Learning and Information, 3rd Edition, 2018.  
4. John Hunt, “A Beginners Guide to Python 3 Programming”, Springer, 2020. 
REFERENCE WEBSITE:  
1. https://www.tensorflow.org/  
2. https://github.com/pytorch 
 
 
 
 
BTSL3502 CRYPTOGRAPHY AND NETWORK SECURITY LAB L T P C 
 0  0  2 1 
Course Objectives:  
1. Explain the objectives of information security.  
2. Explain the importance and application of each of confidentiality, integrity, 
authentication and availability. 
3. Understand various cryptographic algorithms. 
4. To Implement the security algorithm 
5. To Apply the security algorithm 
  List of Experiments:  
1. Write a C program that contains a string (char pointer) with a value ‘Hello world’. The 
program should XOR each character in this string with 0 and displays the result.  
2. Write a C program that contains a string (char pointer) with a value ‘Hello world’. The 
program should AND or and XOR each character in this string with 127 and display 
the result.  
3. Write a Java program to perform encryption and decryption using the following 
algorithms a. Ceaser cipher b. Substitution cipher c. Hill Cipher  
4. Write a C/JAVA program to implement the DES algorithm logic.  
5. Write a C/JAVA program to implement the Blowfish algorithm logic. 
6. Write a C/JAVA program to implement the Rijndael algorithm logic.  
7. Write the RC4 logic in Java Using Java cryptography; encrypt the text “Hello world” 
using Blowfish. Create your own key using Java key tool.  
8. Write a Java program to implement RSA algorithm.  
9. Implement the Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange mechanism using HTML and 
JavaScript.  
10. Calculate the message digest of a text using the SHA-1 algorithm in JAVA.  
11. Calculate the message digest of a text using the MD5 algorithm in JAVA.  
Course Outcomes:  
1. Understand basic cryptographic algorithms, message and web authentication and 
security issues.  
2. Identify information system requirements for both of them such as client and server.  
3. Understand the current legal issues towards information security. 
4. Distinguish and explain different protocol like SSL and TLS  
5. Comprehend and apply authentication, email security, web security services and 
mechanisms 
 
TEXT BOOKS:  
1. Cryptography and Network Security - Principles and Practice: William Stallings, 
Pearson Education, 6th Edition.  
2. Cryptography and Network Security: Atul Kahate, McGraw Hill, 3rd Edition. 
  
 REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1. Cryptography and Network Security: C K Shyamala, N Harini, Dr T R Padmanabhan, 
Wiley India, 1st Edition.  
2. Cryptography and Network Security: Forouzan Mukhopadhyay, McGraw Hill, 3rd 
Edition.  
3. Information Security, Principles, and Practice: Mark Stamp, Wiley India. 
4. Principles of Computer Security: WM. Arthur Conklin, Greg White, TMH.  
5. Introduction to Network Security: Neal Krawetz, CENGAGE Learning.  
6. Network Security and Cryptography: Bernard Menezes, CENGAGE Learning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BTCT3901             ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND STARTUP MANAGEMENT       L   T   P   C 
3   0   0   0 
Course Description: This course is intended to help the students to learn the basic concepts 
and functions of entrepreneurship and its importance in building start ups and provide regional 
employment opportunities and sustainability  
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Introducing fundamental concepts of entrepreneurship  
2. To obtain knowledge of organizational assistance available to entrepreneurs  
3. Introducing various aspects related to marketing inputs for entrepreneurs 
4. To provide meaningful inputs for start-up management  
5. To make students knowledgeable about start up survival and growth 
 
UNIT I Introduction to Entrepreneurship           12 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship- Scope, Factors affecting growth of entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurship 
Development program, Characteristics and qualities of an entrepreneur, identification of 
business opportunities  
 
UNIT II    Organizational Assistance to    Entrepreneurs                                           9 Hrs    
Assistance to an entrepreneur, New Ventures, Industrial Park (Meaning, features), Financial 
assistance by different agencies, Export oriented units, Industrial estates                                                           
 
UNIT III Marketing for entrepreneurs                                                                        8 hrs     
 Product Management, Marketing research and consumer behaviour, Pricing, Advertising and 
sales promotion, Rural marketing, Export marketing                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
UNITIV   Start-up Management                                                                                   8 hrs                        
The rise of startup economy, Startup ideation and venture choices, Startup capital 
requirements, funding start-ups with bootstrapping- crowd funding 
 
UNITV    Start-up Survival and Growth:                                                                    8 hrs  
Stages of growth in a new venture- Growing with the market - Growing within the industry- 
Venture life patterns, planning for Harvest and Exit 
 
  
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic knowledge of fundamental concepts of entrepreneurship. 
2. Understanding of organizational assistance available to entrepreneurs. 
3. Understanding and implementing start up management. 
4. Identified various sources of requirements to Startup  
5. Apply the process of startup to improve the business 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Gupta, B. L., Kumar, A. (2009). Entrepreneurship Development. India: Mahamaya 
Publishing House. 
2. CHOLE, R. R. K. (2012). Entrepreneurship Development And Communication 
Skills. India: Scientific Publisher (India). 
Reference Books: 
1. Crane, F. G. (2009). Marketing for Entrepreneurs: Concepts and Applications for 
New Ventures. United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
2. Crane, F. G. (2021). Marketing for Entrepreneurs: Concepts and Applications for 
New Ventures. United States: SAGE Publications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI SEMESTER 
BTST3503 FULL STACK WEB DEVELOPMENT L   T   P   C 
3   0   0   3 
 
Prerequisite: Programming for Problem Solving 
Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive exploration of full-stack development, covering key 
components such as Node.js, MongoDB, Express, Angular, and React. Students will gain a 
solid understanding of web development frameworks and MVC architecture. The curriculum 
delves into practical aspects, including creating Node.js applications, building with MongoDB, 
implementing Express and Angular in web applications, and developing React applications.  
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the basics of Web Development.  
2. Acquire knowledge about front end tool JavaScript. 
3. Apply front-end libraries AngularJS and ReactJS in web applications.  
4. Acquire knowledge Node.js features and applications 
5. Develop applications with MongoDB.  
 
Unit – I – Introduction                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Introduction to Web: Internet and World Wide Web, User, Browser, Web Server - HTML5 - 
CSS3 - Anatomy of a web page - Version Control System – Git and GitHub 
  
Unit – II Front End Development 9 Hrs 
JavaScript: The Basic of JavaScript: Objects, Primitives Operations and Expressions, Control 
Statements, Arrays, Functions, Constructors, Pattern Matching using Regular Expressions – 
JQuery – JSX – Single Page Applications – MVC Architecture. 
Unit – III Front-End Framework 9 Hrs 
ReactJS:  Introduction, Components, Props, Hooks, Redux, More Redux, React Forms.  
AngularJS: Introduction, Expressions, Modules, ng-model directive, Data Binding, Controller, 
Scope, Form Validation. 
Unit – IV Back-End Framework 9 Hrs 
NodeJS: Basics of Node JS – Installation – Working with Node packages – Using Node 
package manager – Creating a simple Node.js application – Using Events – Listeners –Timers - 
Callbacks – Handling Data I/O – Implementing HTTP services in Node.js 
ExpressJS: Introduction to Express Framework, Getting Started with Express, Configuring 
Routes - Using Request and Response objects, Your first Express App. 
 
 
 
Unit – V Database and Deployment 9 Hrs 
Understanding NoSQL and MongoDB – Building MongoDB Environment – User accounts – 
Access control – Administering databases – Managing collections – Connecting to MongoDB 
from Node.js – simple applications - Deploying Applications: Web hosting & Domains, 
Deployment Using Cloud Platforms. 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, students will be able to  
1. Understand the basics of web development.  
2. Understand the various JavaScript libraries for web application development. 
3. Analyze the features of Angular and Express. 
4. Design and implementation of  Node.js application. 
5. Deploy web applications on cloud platforms 
 
Text Books: 
1. Web Design with HTML, CSS, JavaScript and JQuery Set Book by Jon Duckett, 2014 
2. Professional JavaScript for Web Developers Book by Nicholas C. Zakas, 2012 
3. Brad Dayley, Brendan Dayley, Caleb Dayley, ‘Node.js, MongoDB and Angular Web 
Development’, Addison-Wesley, Second Edition, 2018.  
4. Full Stack JavaScript: Learn Backbone.js, Node.js and MongoDB. Copyright © 2015 
BY AZAT MARDAN 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Chris Northwood, ‘The Full Stack Developer: Your Essential Guide to the Everyday 
Skills  
2. Expected of a Modern Full Stack Web Developer’, Apress; 1st edition, 2018.  
3. Kirupa Chinnathambi, ‘Learning React: A Hands-On Guide to Building Web 
Applications    
4. Using React and Redux’, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2nd edition, 2018.  
5. Full-Stack JavaScript Development by Eric Bush., Published by Red Sky, 2016 
6. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/the_full_stack_web_development/index.asp  
7. https://www.coursera.org/specializations/full-stack-react.  
8. https://www.udemy.com/course/the-full-stack-web-development/ 
 
BTST3504 CYBER SECURITY L   T  P  C 
3   0   0   3 
 
 
Prerequisite: Cloud Computing, Network Security 
Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive exploration of the dynamic field of cybersecurity, 
encompassing essential concepts, threats, protective measures, and ethical considerations. We 
will acquire the knowledge and skills needed to defend against cyber threats, ensure data 
integrity and availability, and navigate the complex landscape of cybersecurity. The course 
aims to equip holistic understanding of cybersecurity principles and practices, fostering the 
ability to safeguard digital assets in an ever-evolving digital world. 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Develop a foundational comprehension of cybersecurity concepts, encompassing threats, 
vulnerabilities, and protective strategies. 
2.   Identify  and  categorize  common  cyber  threats,  understand  their  propagation,  and 
implement effective countermeasures. 
3.   Explore techniques for ensuring data integrity, authentication, and data availability, while 
comprehending cryptographic controls. 
4.   Develop skills to respond to cybersecurity incidents, execute disaster recovery plans, and 
enhance system availability. 
5.   Analyse the ethical dimensions of cybersecurity, understand professional responsibilities, 
and uphold ethical standards in the field. 
 
 
UNIT I : Cybersecurity Essentials and Cube 9 Hrs 
The  Cybersecurity  World,  Cyber  Criminals  versus  Cybersecurity  Specialists,  Common 
Threats, Spreading Cybersecurity Threats, The Three Dimensions of the Cybersecurity Cube, 
CIA  Triad,  States  of  Data,  Cybersecurity  Countermeasures,  IT  Security  Management 
Framework. 
 
 
UNIT II : Cybersecurity Threats, Vulnerabilities, Attacks and Protecting Secrets   9 Hrs 
Introduction, Governance, Managing Cloud Security Risk, Compliance, Legal Issues in Cloud, 
Audit, CSA Tools. 
 
 
UNIT III: Data Integrity 9 Hrs 
Types of  Data  Integrity  Controls,  Digital  Signatures,  Certificates,  Database  Integrity 
Enforcement. 
 
 
UNIT IV: Data Availability and Recovery 9 Hrs 
High Availability, Measures to Improve Availability, Incident Response, Disaster Recovery. 
 
 
UNIT: V Protecting a Cybersecurity Domain 9 Hrs 
Defending  Systems  and  Devices,  Server  Hardening,  Network  Hardening,  Physical  and 
Environmental Security, Cybersecurity Domains, Ethics of Working in Cybersecurity. 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Demonstrate various cyber threats and vulnerabilities, understanding their potential 
impact on digital assets. 
2. Implement proactive measures to mitigate cyber threats and protect against common 
attack vectors. 
3. Apply cryptographic techniques to ensure data integrity, authenticity,
 and confidentiality. 
4. Develop incident response plans and disaster recovery strategies to minimize the impact 
of cybersecurity incidents. 
5. Understand  to  ethical  principles  and  professional  responsibilities  while  making 
informed decisions in the realm of cybersecurity. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   CISSP (ISC)2 Certified Information Systems Security Professional Official Study Guide, 
Mike Chapple, James Michael Stewart and Darril Gibson, 9th Edition 
2.   Cybersecurity: The Beginner's Guide, Dr. Erdal Ozkaya, Packt Publishing Limited, 2019. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Cybersecurity Essentials, Charles J. Brooks, Christopher Grow, Philip Craig and Donald 
Short, 1st edition, Sybex. 
2.   Network Security Essentials, William Stallings, 6th edition, Pearson Education, 2018. 
SOTT3402a DESIGN PATTERNS                                                      L  T  P  C 
 
                                                                          3  0  0  3 
Prerequisite: Object Oriented Programming 
Course Description: 
The course addresses general principles and specific methods for design pattern and 
modular software subsystems. A notion of a design pattern is introduced as a well-known 
and tested solution to a recurring problem in a particular problem domain. In this course 
students will learn techniques to identify design problems and apply design patterns 
effectively to improve the quality of software. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the concept of Design patterns and its importance. 
2. Understand the behavioral knowledge of the problem and solutions. 
3. Relate the Creational, Structural, behavioral Design patterns. 
4. Apply the suitable design patterns to refine the basic design for given context. 
5. Implement a module so that it executes efficiently and correctly. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                         10 Hrs 
Introduction: Design Pattern, Design Patterns in Smalltalk MVC, Describing Design 
Patterns, The Catalog of Design Patterns, Organizing the Catalog, How Design Patterns 
Solve Design Problems, How to Select a Design Pattern, How to Use a Design Pattern. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                        10 Hrs 
A Case Study: Designing a Document Editor: Design Problems, Document Structure, 
Formatting, Embellishing the User Interface, Supporting Multiple Look-and-Feel 
Standards, Supporting Multiple Window Systems, User Operations Spelling Checking and 
Hyphenation. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                       8 Hrs 
Creational Patterns: Abstract Factory, Builder, Factory Method, Prototype, 
Singleton. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                       8 Hrs 
Structural Patterns: Adapter, Bridge, Composite, Decorator, Façade, Flyweight, 
Proxy. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                     9 Hrs  
Behavioral  Patterns:  Chain  of  Responsibility,  Command,  Interpreter,  Iterator,  
Mediator, Memento, Observer, Strategy, Template Method, Visitor. Conclusion: What to 
Expect from Design Patterns, The Pattern Community. 
 
 
  
Course Outcomes: 
On completion of the course, student will be able to: 
1. Identify the appropriate design patterns to solve object-oriented design problems. 
2.  Develop design solutions using creational patterns. 
3. Apply structural patterns to solve design problems.  
4. Construct design solutions by using behavioral patterns. 
5. Design the software using Pattern Oriented Architectures.  
 
 
Text Books 
1. Design Patterns by Erich Gamma, Pearson Education 
2. Design Patterns Explained by Alan Shalloway, Pearson Education. 
 
References 
 
1. Meta Patterns designed by Wolf gang, Pearson. 
2. Head First Design Patterns by Eric Freeman-Oreilly. 
3. JAVA Enterprise Design Patterns Vol-III By Mark Grand, Wiley DreamTech. 
4. Patterns in JAVA Vol-I By Mark Grand, Wiley DreamTech. 
4. Patterns in JAVA Vol-II By Mark Grand, Wiley DreamTech. 
 
SOTT3402b CYBER SECURITY L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
 
Prerequisite: Cloud Computing, Network Security 
Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive exploration of the dynamic field of cybersecurity, 
encompassing essential concepts, threats, protective measures, and ethical considerations. We 
will acquire the knowledge and skills needed to defend against cyber threats, ensure data 
integrity and availability, and navigate the complex landscape of cybersecurity. The course 
aims to equip holistic understanding of cybersecurity principles and practices, fostering the 
ability to safeguard digital assets in an ever-evolving digital world.  
Course Objectives: 
1. Develop a foundational comprehension of cybersecurity concepts, encompassing 
threats, vulnerabilities, and protective strategies. 
2. Identify and categorize common cyber threats, understand their propagation, and 
implement effective countermeasures. 
3. Explore techniques for ensuring data integrity, authentication, and data availability, 
while comprehending cryptographic controls. 
4. Develop skills to respond to cybersecurity incidents, execute disaster recovery plans, 
and enhance system availability. 
5. Analyse the ethical dimensions of cybersecurity, understand professional 
responsibilities, and uphold ethical standards in the field. 
 
 
UNIT I : Cybersecurity Essentials and Cube 9 Hrs 
The  Cybersecurity  World,  Cyber  Criminals  versus  Cybersecurity  Specialists,  Common 
Threats, Spreading Cybersecurity Threats, The Three Dimensions of the Cybersecurity Cube, 
CIA  Triad,  States  of  Data,  Cybersecurity  Countermeasures,  IT  Security  Management 
Framework. 
 
 
UNIT II : Cybersecurity Threats, Vulnerabilities, Attacks and Protecting Secrets   9 Hrs 
Introduction, Governance, Managing Cloud Security Risk, Compliance, Legal Issues in Cloud, 
Audit, CSA Tools. 
 
 
UNIT III: Data Integrity 9 Hrs 
Types  of  Data  Integrity  Controls,  Digital  Signatures,  Certificates,  Database  Integrity 
Enforcement. 
 
 
UNIT IV: Data Availability and Recovery 9 Hrs 
High Availability, Measures to Improve Availability, Incident Response, Disaster Recovery. 
 
 
UNIT: V Protecting a Cybersecurity Domain 9 Hrs 
Defending  Systems  and  Devices,  Server  Hardening,  Network  Hardening,  Physical  and 
Environmental Security, Cybersecurity Domains, Ethics of Working in Cybersecurity. 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Demonstrate various cyber threats and vulnerabilities, understanding their potential 
impact on digital assets. 
2. Implement proactive measures to mitigate cyber threats and protect against common 
attack vectors. 
3. Apply cryptographic techniques to ensure data integrity, authenticity,
 and confidentiality. 
4. Develop incident response plans and disaster recovery strategies to minimize the impact 
of cybersecurity incidents. 
5. Understand to ethical principles and professional responsibilities while  informed 
decisions in the realm of cybersecurity. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. CISSP (ISC)2 Certified Information Systems Security Professional Official Study 
Guide, Mike Chapple, James Michael Stewart and Darril Gibson, 9th Edition 
2. Cybersecurity: The Beginner's Guide, Dr. Erdal Ozkaya, Packt Publishing Limited, 
2019. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Cybersecurity Essentials, Charles J. Brooks, Christopher Grow, Philip Craig and Donald 
Short, 1st edition, Sybex. 
2. Network Security Essentials, William Stallings, 6th edition, Pearson Education, 
2018. 
 
SOTT3402c SOFTWARE PROJECT MANAGEMENT L T   P  C 
                  3   0   0   3 
 
 
Prerequisites:  A basic understanding of Software Engineering 
Course Description: This course is aimed at introducing the primary important concepts of 
project management related to managing software development projects. They will also get 
familiar with the different activities involved in Software Project Management. Further, they 
will also come to know how to successfully plan and implement a software project management 
activity, and to complete a specific project in time with the available budget. 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1. To understand the Software Project Planning and Evaluation techniques. 
2. To plan and manage projects at each stage of the software development life cycle (SDLC). 
3. To learn about activity planning and risk management principles. 
4. To manage software projects and control software deliverables. 
5. To develop skills to manage the various phases involved in project management and people 
management. 
 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Project Evaluation and Project Planning: Importance of Software Project Management – 
Activities – Methodologies – Categorization of Software Projects – Setting objectives – 
Management Principles – Management Control – Project portfolio Management – Cost-benefit 
evaluation technology – Risk evaluation – Strategic program Management – Stepwise Project 
Planning. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Project Life Cycle and Effort Estimation: Software process and Process Models – Choice of 
Process models – Rapid Application development – Agile methods – Dynamic System 
Development Method – Extreme Programming– Managing interactive processes – Basics of 
Software estimation – Effort and Cost estimation techniques – COSMIC Full function points – 
COCOMO II – a Parametric Productivity Model. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                         9 Hrs 
Activity Planning and Risk Management: Objectives of Activity planning – Project schedules – Activities – Sequencing and scheduling – Network Planning models – Formulating Network 
Model – Forward Pass & Backward Pass techniques – Critical path (CRM) method – Risk 
identification – Assessment – Risk Planning –Risk Management – – PERT technique – Monte 
Carlo simulation – Resource Allocation – Creation of critical paths – Cost schedules. 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Project Management and Control: Framework for Management and control – Collection of data – Visualizing progress – Cost monitoring – Earned Value Analysis – Prioritizing Monitoring – 
Project tracking – Change control – Software Configuration Management – Managing 
contracts – Contract Management. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Staffing in Software Projects: Managing people – Organizational behavior – Best methods of 
staff selection – Motivation – The Oldham – Hackman job characteristic model – Stress – 
Health and Safety – Ethical and Professional concerns – Working in teams – Decision making –  Organizational  structures  –  Dispersed  and  Virtual  teams  –  Communications  genres  – 
Communication plans – Leadership. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand the basic concepts, terminologies and issues of software project 
management. 
2. Identify & analyze the different project contexts and suggest an appropriate management 
strategy. 
3. Practice the role of professional ethics in successful software development. 
4. Identify and describe the key phases of project management. 
5. Determine an appropriate project management approach through an evaluation of the 
business context and scope of the project. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Bob Hughes, Mike Cotterell and Rajib Mall: Software Project Management – Fifth Edition, 
Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2012. 
2. Software Project Management, by Walker Royce, Pearson Education 
 
 
References: 
1. Effective project management: Traditional, Agile, Extreme, Robert Wysocki, Sixth Edition, 
Wiley India, 2011. 
2.  Software Project Management, Bob Hughes & Mike Cotterell, fourth edition, Tata Mc- 
Graw Hill,2006 
3. Applied Software Project Management, Andrew Stellman & Jennifer Greene, O’Reilly, 
2006. 
 
SOTT3402d AGILE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT L   T   P  C 
             3   0   0   3 
 
 
Pre-Requisite: Software Engineering 
 
Course Description: 
In this course, students will be introduced to the high-level aspects of agile planning, including 
product vision and roadmaps. Students will also learn how to manage requirements at the 
tactical level, including gathering, writing, and prioritizing requirements using agile techniques 
from each of the major frameworks. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To learn methodology and issues. 
2. To  learn  the  fundamental  principles  and  practices  associated  with  various  agile 
development methods. 
3. To learn how agile methods scale to large and distributed projects, including the role of 
systems engineering. 
4.  To understand the process of SCRUM in software development 
5. To learn advance process of software implementation through various case studies 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                              10 Hrs 
Introduction to Agile: Introduction to Agile Software Process Model - Agile Methodology & 
Principles – Types – Benefits - Life Cycle, Agile Project Management – Design and 
Construction - Agile Testing-Agile Tools. Agile Processes: Key Process Areas in CMM – 
Quality Improvement – Six Sigma : Six Sigma Overview, DMAIC - Define, Measure, Analyze, 
Improve, Control; DMADV -Define, Measure, Analyze, Design, Verify; Lean : Lean 
Overview, Lean Principles, Lean Rules, Lean Implementation - The 8 Forms of Waste; Lean 
Tools - 5 Why's, Pareto. 
 
 
UNIT II 8 Hrs 
Agile Requirements: Meeting the requirements challenge iteratively-Requirements for Agile 
approach – Gathering & analysis –Behavior Driven Development (BDD) and Acceptance Test 
Driven Development (ATDD)- Designing storyboards and scrums in Agile approach. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Agile Methodologies: Pair Programming – Refactoring – Dynamic Systems Development 
(DSD) – Feature Driven Development (FDD) – Test Driven Development (TDD), Agile 
Unified Process – Agile Failure Models - Various reasons why agile fails 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
SCRUM: Scrum Foundations - Scrum Roles - Scrum Master - Product Owner – Team - Scrum 
Meetings - Scrum Artifacts - Product Backlog - Sprint Backlog - Burn-down Charts - Scaling 
Scrum – Manager in Scrum and Product Backlog. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Agile  Planning  and  Estimation:  Principles  of  Agile  Metrics  –  Release,  Planning  and 
Estimation in Scrum. 
Advanced Concepts and Case Studies: Scrum and Large Projects – Distributed Scrum – 
Agile Adoption - A case study of a scrum project, Scrum Success Stories. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand of agile software engineering and its advantages 
2. Understand software engineering standards for Agile process 
3. To apply agile software engineering practices over the entire software development 
lifecycle. 
4. Understand Scrum Framework and its application scenarios. 
5. To understand Agile Metrics Release Planning and Estimation in Scrum based software 
development. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. K.S. Rubin, Essential Scrum: A Practical Guide to the Most Popular Agile Process, 
Addison-Wesley, 2012. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. M.  Cohn,  Succeeding  with  Agile:  Software  Development  Using  Scrum,  Addison- 
Wesley, 2009 
2. S.W. Ambler, M. Lines, Disciplined Agile Delivery: A Practitioner's Guide to Agile 
Software Delivery in the Enterprise, IBM Press, 2012. 
3. Chetankumar Patel,  Muthu  Ramachandran,  Story  Card Maturity  Model  (SMM):  A 
Process Improvement Framework for Agile Requirements Engineering Practices, Journal 
of Software,Academy Publishers, Vol 4, No 5 (2009), 422-435, Jul 2009. 
4. Kevin C. Desouza, Agile information systems: conceptualization, construction, and 
management,Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007 
5. K. Beck, C. Andres, Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, 2nd Edition, 
Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
 
SOTT3402e  Cloud Computing L   T   P C 
                          3   0   0   3 
 
 
Pre-requisites- Operating Systems and Computer Networks 
   
Course Description: 
This course covers topics such as cloud architecture, virtualization, security, and deployment 
models. Demystifies cloud infrastructure components, including virtual machines, networking, 
and storage. The students gain foundational knowledge of Hybrid, Multicloud, Microservices, 
Serverless, Application Modernization, and cloud security and monitoring. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to, 
1.   Understand the concept of cloud computing. 
2.   Appreciate the evolution of cloud from the existing technologies. 
3.   Gain knowledge on the architecture, the services and storage in cloud computing. 
4.   Familiarize with managing the resources and securing the cloud. 
5.   Appreciate the emergence of cloud as the next generation computing paradigm. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Introduction to Cloud Computing – Definition of Cloud – Evolution of Cloud Computing – 
Underlying Principles of Parallel and Distributed Computing – Cloud Characteristics – 
Elasticity in Cloud – On-demand Provisioning. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Cloud Enabling Technologies: Service Oriented Architecture – REST and Systems of 
Systems – Web Services – Publish-Subscribe Model – Basics of Virtualization – Types of 
Virtualization – Implementation Levels of Virtualization – Virtualization Structures – Tools 
and Mechanisms – Virtualization of CPU – Memory – I/O Devices –Virtualization Support 
and Disaster Recovery. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Cloud Architecture, Services and Storage: Layered Cloud Architecture Design – NIST 
Cloud Computing Reference Architecture – Public, Private and Hybrid Clouds – laaS – PaaS – SaaS – Architectural Design Challenges – Cloud Storage – Storage-as-a-Service – 
Advantages of Cloud Storage – Cloud Storage Providers – S3. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Resource Management and Security in Cloud: Inter Cloud Resource Management – 
Resource Provisioning and Resource Provisioning Methods – Global Exchange of Cloud 
Resources – Security Overview – Cloud Security Challenges – Software-as-a-Service Security – Security Governance – Virtual Machine Security – IAM – Security Standards. 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Cloud Technologies and Advancements: Hadoop – Map Reduce – Virtual Box — Google 
App Engine – Programming Environment for Google App Engine –– Open Stack – Federation 
in the Cloud – Four Levels of Federation – Federated Services and Applications – Future of 
Federation. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
On Completion of the course, the students should be able to: 
1.   Articulate the main concepts, key technologies, strengths and limitations of cloud 
computing. 
2.   Learn the key and enabling technologies that help in the development of cloud. 
3.   Develop the ability to understand and use the architecture of compute and storage cloud, 
service and delivery models. 
4.   Explain the core issues of cloud computing such as resource management and security. 
5.   Evaluate and choose the appropriate technologies, algorithms and approaches for 
implementation and use of cloud. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Rajkumar Buyya, Christian Vecchiola, S. ThamaraiSelvi, ―Mastering Cloud Computing, 
Tata Mcgraw Hill, 2013. 
2. Kai Hwang, Geoffrey C. Fox, Jack G. Dongarra, “Distributed and Cloud Computing, From 
Parallel Processing to the Internet of Things”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2012. 
 
 
References Books: 
1. Rajkumar Buyya, Christian Vecchiola, S. ThamaraiSelvi, ―Mastering Cloud Computing, 
Tata Mcgraw Hill, 2013. 
2. Toby Velte, Anthony Velte, Robert Elsenpeter, “Cloud Computing – A Practical Approach, 
Tata Mcgraw Hill, 2009. 
3. George Reese, “Cloud Application Architectures: Building Applications and Infrastructure 
in the Cloud: Transactional Systems for EC2 and Beyond (Theory in Practice), O’Reilly, 2009. 
 
SOTT3402f MOBILE COMPUTING L   T   P  C 
                       3   0   0   3 
 
 
Pre-requisites-  Computer Networks 
 
Course Description: 
This course explores various challenges and opportunities of mobile computing, including 
topics such as wireless network protocols and standards, location awareness, sensing, user 
interfaces, application development, and security/privacy concerns. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To learn about various wireless & cellular communication networks and various telephone 
and satellite networks. 
2. To build knowledge on various Adhoc and sensor networks routing protocol 
3.To gain knowledge of energy efficient protocol. 
4. To build skills in working with Cognitive radio networks and recent telecommunication 
networks 
5. To design and development of various network protocol using simulation tools. 
 
 
UNIT I  9 Hrs 
Introduction: Overview of wireless and mobile infrastructure; Preliminary concepts on 
cellular architecture; Design objectives and performance issues; Radio resource management 
and interface; Propagation and path loss models; Channel interference and frequency reuse; 
Cell splitting; Channel assignment strategies; Overview of generations: - 1G to 5G 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Location and handoff management: Introduction to location management (HLR and VLR); 
Mobility models characterizing individual node movement (Random walk, Fluid flow, 
Markovian, Activity-based) 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Wireless transmission fundamentals: Introduction to narrow and wideband systems; Spread 
spectrum; Frequency hopping; Introduction to MIMO; MIMO Channel Capacity and diversity 
gain; Introduction to OFDM; MIMO-OFDM system; Multiple access control (FDMA, TDMA, 
CDMA, SDMA); Wireless local area network; Wireless personal area network (Bluetooth and 
zigbee). 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Mobile Ad-hoc networks: Characteristics and applications; Coverage and connectivity 
problems; Routing in MANETs. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Cognitive radio networks: Fixed and dynamic spectrum access; Direct and indirect spectrum 
sensing; Spectrum sharing; Interoperability and co-existence issues; Applications of cognitive 
radio networks. 
 
 
Course Outcome: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Understand the working principles of mobile networks and Contrast different types of 
telecommunication networks. 
2. Study on location, handoff management and wireless fundamentals. 
3.  Study  on  MANET  and  Sensor  networks  including  architecture,  routing  and  power 
optimization technique. 
4. Study on cognitive ratio networks and its applications. 
5. Assess the recent telecommunication networks, resource management 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Jochen Schiller, Mobile Communications. Pearson Education, 2009. 
2. Andrea Goldsmith, Wireless Communications. Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
 
 
Reference Books : 
1. Ivan Stojmenovic, Handbook of Wireless Networking and Mobile Computing, Wiley, 2002. 
2. Ezio Biglieri, Andrea J. Goldsmith, Larry J. Greenstein, Narayan Mandayam and H. Vincent 
Poor, Principles of Cognitive Radio. Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
3.   Shwetha,   V.,   &   Yashas,   G.   (2022).   Extended   reality:   the   future   of   mobile 
computing. International Research Journal of Modernization in Engineering Technology and 
Science, 4(7), 1521-1524. 
 
SOTT3402g IMAGE PROCESSING L   T   P   C 
                         3   0   0   3 
 
 
Pre-requisites- Computer Graphics 
 
Course Description: 
To learn and understand the fundamentals of digital image processing, and various image 
Transforms, Image Enhancement Techniques, Image restoration Techniques and methods, 
image compression and Segmentation used in digital image processing. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To study the image fundamentals and mathematical transforms necessary for image 
processing. 
2. To study the image enhancement techniques. 
3. To study image compression procedures. 
4. To have an understanding of colour models, type of image representations and related 
statistics. 
5. To study image segmentation and representation techniques. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Introduction: Overview of Image Processing, The Origins of Digital Image Processing, 
Examples of Fields that Use Digital Image Processing, Fundamental Steps in Digital Image 
Processing, Components of an Image Processing System. Digital Image Fundamentals: 
Elements of Visual Perception, Light and the Electromagnetic Spectrum, Image Sensing and 
Acquisition, Image Sampling and Quantization, Some Basic Relationships Between Pixels, 
Introduction to the Basic Mathematical Tools Used in Digital Image Processing. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Intensity Transformations and Spatial Filtering: Basic Intensity Transformation Functions, 
Histogram Processing, Fundamentals of Spatial Filtering, Smoothing (Lowpass) Spatial Filters, 
Sharpening  (Highpass)  Spatial  Filters,  Highpass,  Bandreject,  and  Bandpass  Filters  from 
Lowpass Filters, Combining Spatial Enhancement Methods. Filtering in the Frequency 
Domain: Sampling and the Fourier Transform of Sampled Functions, The Discrete Fourier 
Transform of One Variable, Extensions to Functions of Two Variables, Some Properties of the 
2-D DFT and IDFT, The Basics of Filtering in the Frequency Domain, Image Smoothing Using 
Lowpass Frequency Domain Filters, Image Sharpening Using Highpass Filters, Selective 
Filtering, The Fast Fourier Transform. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Image Restoration and Reconstruction: A Model of the Image Degradation/Restoration 
Process, Noise Models, Restoration in the Presence of Noise Only—Spatial Filtering, Periodic 
Noise Reduction Using Frequency Domain Filtering, Linear, Position-Invariant Degradations, 
Estimating the Degradation Function, Inverse Filtering, Minimum Mean Square Error (Wiener) 
Filtering, Constrained Least Squares Filtering, Geometric Mean Filter, Image Reconstruction 
from Projections. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Colour  Image  Processing:  Color  Fundamentals,  Color  Models,  Pseudocolor  Image 
Processing, Basics of Full-Color Image Processing, Color Transformations, Color Image 
Smoothing and Sharpening, Using Color in Image Segmentation, Noise in Color Images, Color 
Image Compression. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Image Compression: Fundamentals, Models, Error free and lossy compression, Standards. 
Morphological Image Processing: Erosion and Dilation, Opening and Closing, The Hit-or- 
Miss  Transform,  Some  Basic  Morphological  Algorithms,  Morphological  Reconstruction. 
Image segmentation. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
On successful completion of the course, the student will: 
1.   Be able to understand basic concepts image processing, image storage and types of 
transformations that can be applied to images. 
2.   Be able to compare the domains and methods of image processing. 
3.   Be able to learn and compare Image Enhancement and Restoration techniques. 
4.   Be able to learn and analyse colour image processing. 
5.   Familiar with morphological image processing. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Digital Image Processing, Fourth Edition, Global edition by Rafel C. Gonzalez and 
Richard E. Woods, Pearson Education. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Digital Image Processing by Bhabatosh Chanda and Dwijesh Majumder, PHI. 
2. Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing by Anil K Jain, PHI. 
3. Digital Image Processing Using Matlab, Rafel C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods, 
Pearson Education. 
 
SOTT3402h DEEP LEARNING L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
 
Prerequisite: Python Programming, Machine Learning 
 
Course Description: 
 
This course introduces students to the fascinating field of deep learning, which is a subset of 
machine learning focused on neural networks and their applications. Students will learn about 
neural network architectures, training techniques, and various deep learning applications, 
preparing them for real-world projects and research opportunities. 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Understand  the  fundamentals  of  deep  learning,  including  activation  functions  and 
Optimization Techniques. 
2.   Learn about the Neural Networks. 
3.   Learn and analysis the conventional neural networks. 
4.   Learn and analysis the recurrent neural networks. 
5.   Understand an image processing using DL algorithms 
 
 
UNIT I Introduction to Deep Learning 9 Hrs 
Introduction to Deep Learning, Decision Surfaces, Deep Feed, Forward Neural Networks, 
Gradient Descent, Back-Propagation and Other Differentiation Algorithms, Rectified Linear 
Unit (ReLU), Heuristics for Avoiding Bad Local Minima, Heuristics for Faster Training, 
Nestors Accelerated Gradient Descent, Regularization for Deep Learning, Optimization 
Techniques, Gradient Descent, Batch Optimization. 
 
 
UNIT II Neural Network 9 Hrs 
Introduction  to  Neural  Network,  Multilayer  Perceptron,  Back  Propagation  Learning, 
Unsupervised Learning with Deep Network, Autoencoders. 
 
 
UNIT III Convolutional Neural Networks 9 Hrs 
Convolutional Neural Network, building blocks of CNN, CNN Architectures, Convolution, 
Pooling Layers, Transfer Learning, Image Classification using Transfer Learning, Revisiting 
Gradient Descent, Momentum Optimizer, RMSProp, Adam. Case study: Develop a simple 
application for Classify the animals by using CNN approach. 
 
 
UNIT IV Recurrent Neural Networks 9 Hrs 
Recurrent and Recursive Nets – Recurrent Neural Networks – Deep Recurrent Networks – 
Recursive Neural Networks – Applications, Case study: Develop a simple application for 
Classify the cancer by using RNN approach. 
 
 
UNIT V Image Processing using DL 9 Hrs 
Classical Supervised Tasks with Deep Learning, Image Denoising, Semantic Segmentation, 
Object Detection, LSTM Networks, Generative Modelling with DL, Case Study: Implement 
of any one deep learning algorithm with TensorFlow and Keras tools. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Understand the role of deep learning in machine learning applications. 
2.   Demonstrate the neural networks. 
3.   Design and implement convolutional neural networks. 
4.   Design and implement recurrent neural networks. 
5.   Demonstrate and Analysis the image processing in deep learning. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Deep Learning- Ian Goodfelllow, Yoshua Benjio, Aaron Courville, The MIT Press, 2017 
2.   Pattern Classification, Richard O. Duda, Peter E. Hart, David G. Stork, John Wiley & 
Sons Inc. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Deep Learning for Computer Vision, Rajalingappaa Shanmugamani, Packt Publishing, 
2018. 
2.   Matlab  Deep  Learning:  With  Machine  Learning,  Neural  Networks  and  Artificial 
Intelligence, Phil Kim, Apress, 2017. 
3.   Convolutional Neural Networks in Visual Computing, Ragav Venkatesan, Baoxin Li, 
CRC Press, 2018. 
4.   Neural  Network  for  Beginners:  Build  Deep  Neural  Networks  and  Develop  Strong 
Fundamentals   using   Python’s   NumPy,   and   Matplotlib,   Sebastian   Klaas,   BPB 
Publications, 2021. 
 
SOTT3402i E-COMMERCE L   T   P  C 
                    3   0   0   3 
 
 
Prerequisite: Java, Database Management Systems and Web Technologies 
Course Description: 
This course provides an introduction to information systems for business and management. It 
is designed to familiarize students with organizational and managerial foundations of systems, 
the technical foundation for understanding information systems. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the basics of E-Commerce, its models, applications and IT Act. 
2. Illustrate the fundamentals of internet technology, and web page creation in HTML. 
3. Evaluate the tools and security involved in e-payment methods. 
4. Differentiate various frauds involved in E-Commerce. 
5. Familiarize with the applications of EC in functional areas of management. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Introduction: Concept of E-Commerce– Features– Driving forces - Benefits and limitations – 
Applications of E-commerce; B2B and B2C models of E-commerce – E-Commerce vs. E- 
Business - Future of E-commerce. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Internet Technology: Internet infrastructure - Internet vs. intranet vs. extranet – Firewalls - 
Internet protocols TCP/IP, HTTP, SMTP, FTP - Utility programs Telnet, Finger, Ping, Tracer- 
WWW – Internet features and services - Portal vs. Website vs. Communities - HTML and web 
design - Block chain technology. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
E-Payments: Types of e-payments - SET and SSL protocols; EDIFACT, EDI; Process of 
credit card payment - Third Party Processors – Bit coin. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Issues in E-Commerce: Social issues - Legal issues – Privacy issues - Ethical issues – IPR 
issues; Regulatory framework of E-Commerce under Indian Information Technology Act 
2000. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
E-Commerce Applications: Advertising – Supply chain management – Marketing research – 
Financial services – Publishing – Entertainment - Retailing – Trading stocks – Role of ERP 
Solutions in E-Commerce. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand the fundamentals of EC, its applications, and models, and the provisions of IT 
ACT on EC. 
2. Comprehend the internet technology, its protocols, and acquire skills in designing a web 
page through HTML. 
3. Realize the theoretical base on the protocols and cryptography involved in E-payments, 
and methodology involved in the use of e-payment tools. 
4. Critically examine the frauds and piracies involved in EC, including legal, privacy, ethical 
and IPR issues. 
5. Apply the EC technology in advertising, supply chain, marketing research, financial 
services, publishing, entertainment, retailing and stock market trading. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Kenneth C. Laudon, Carol Guercio Traver: E-commerce, 13/e, 2017, Pearson Education 
India. 
2. Michael Chung, Jae Lee, David King, Efraim Turban: E-Commerce – A Managerial 
Perspective, Pearson Education India. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. David Whiteley: E-Commerce- Strategy technologies and Applications, Tata McGraw 
Hill. 
2. Kamalesh Bajaj, Debjani Nag: E-Commerce, the Cutting Edge of Business- Tata McGraw 
Hill. 
 
SOTT3402j                                               BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY                  L   T   P   C 
                                                                                                                                                    3   0   0    3 
Course Description: 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of blockchain technology, its architecture, and 
its applications. Students will explore the fundamentals of blockchain, including decentralized 
networks, cryptographic principles, consensus algorithms, and smart contracts. The course 
covers various blockchain platforms, their use cases across different industries, and the 
challenges and future trends in blockchain technology. Emphasis is placed on theoretical 
knowledge and the analysis of real-world applications and case studies to provide students with 
a comprehensive understanding of blockchain technology and its potential impact.  
Course Objectives: 
The students will try: 
1. To learn the foundational concepts of blockchain and cryptographic primitives. 
2. To analyse different blockchain architectures and their categories. 
3. To understand emerging cryptocurrencies and consensus mechanisms. 
4. To explore advanced blockchain protocols and zero-knowledge proofs. 
5. To apply blockchain technology in areas beyond cryptocurrencies, such as cybersecurity 
and micropayments.                  
 
UNIT I Introduction to Blockchain and Crypto primitives                                            9 Hrs 
 
Blockchain, Distributed Ledgers - Cryptographic basics for cryptocurrency - Hashing, signature 
schemes, encryption schemes and elliptic curve cryptography - CAP theorem and blockchain - 
Categories of Blockchains: Public, Private blockchains, Permissioned Ledger, Tokenized 
blockchains, Tokenless blockchains, Sidechains. Hardware and software requirements of Block 
chain 
 
UNIT II Emerging Cryptocurrencies                                                                              9 Hrs 
  
Distributed identity: Public and private keys, Digital identification and wallets; Decentralized 
network - Distributed ledger: Permissioning framework, Blockchain data structure - Double 
spending; Network consensus -Sybil attacks, Block rewards and miners, Difficulty under 
competition, Forks and consensus chain, The 51% attack, Confirmations and finality - Proof of 
Work ( PoW),  Proof of Stake ( PoS) based Chains - Hybrid models ( PoW + PoS) .  
 
UNIT III Zero Knowledge proofs and protocols in Blockchain                                         9 Hrs 
 
Pseudo-anonymity vs. anonymity: Zero Knowledge proofs and protocols in Blockchain - 
Succinct non interactive argument for Knowledge (SNARK) - pairing on Elliptic curves – 
Zcash. 
 
UNIT IV Building Cryptocurrency and Smart Contracts                                              9 Hrs 
Link between Blockchain and Cryptocurrencies, Mechanics of Bitcoin:  Bitcoin transactions, 
Bitcoin Scripts.  Ethereum - Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) - Wallets for Ethereum - 
Solidity –Smart Contracts – some attacks on smart contracts. 
 
UNIT V Beyond Cryptocurrency                                                                                        9 Hrs     
Applications of Blockchain in cybersecurity, Smart property, Efficient micropayments, 
Coupling Transactions and Payment (Interdependent Transactions), Escrow transactions, 
Auctions and Markets. 
Course Outcomes: 
After Completion of the course the student will be able to 
1. Understand the necessary cryptographic background 
2. Familiarize the mechanism of Blockchain and Cryptocurrency 
3. Analyze the protocols used in Blockchain technology 
4. Examine the major developments related to blockchain and cryptocurrencies. 
5. Identify the applicability of blockchains beyond cryptocurrency. 
 
Textbook(s) 
1. Treccani, A., Lipton, A. (2021). Blockchain And Distributed Ledgers: Mathematics, 
Technology, And Economics - First Edition, Singapore: World Scientific Publishing. 
 
2.  Bashir, I. (2020). Mastering Blockchain: A Deep Dive into Distributed Ledgers, Consensus 
Protocols, Smart Contracts, DApps, Cryptocurrencies, Ethereum, and More - Third Edition, 
United Kingdom: Packt Publishing. 
 
 
 
References Books 
1. Goldfeder, S., Bonneau, J., Miller, A., Felten, E., Narayanan, A. (2016). Bitcoin and 
Cryptocurrency Technologies - First Edition, Princeton University Press. 
2. Wattenhofer, R. (2019). Blockchain Science: Distributed Ledger Technology – Third 
Edition, United States: Independently Published. 
. 
 
SOTT3402k MATHEMATICAL FOUNDATIONS OF DATA SCIENCE L   T   P   C 
       3   0   0   3 
       Prerequisite: Probability and Statistics 
Course Description: 
This course provides a study of various Mathematical Methods and Statistical Methods which 
is needed for Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Data Science and also for 
Computer Science and engineering problems. This course will be rigorous, and will explore 
the rich and fascinating math behind some of the popular techniques and intellectual ideas of 
modern-day data science and machine learning. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To employ methods related to these concepts in a variety of data science applications. 
2.  To adopt a rigorous and mathematical approach to solving problems in machine learning 
and data science. 
3. To apply the mathematical concepts discussed over the duration of the course. 
4. To apply the concepts of probability and distributions to some case studies. 
5. To Correlate results to the solution approach followed (Analysis). 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Data Representation: Distance measures, Projections, Notion of hyper planes, half-planes. 
Principal Component Analysis- Population Principal Components, sample principal 
coefficients, covariance, matrix of data set, Dimensionality reduction, Singular value 
decomposition, Gram Schmidt process. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Single Variable Distribution: Random variables (discrete and continuous), probability 
density  functions,  properties,  Mathematical  Expectation  -  Probability  distribution  - 
Binomial, Poisson approximation to the binomial distribution and normal distribution their 
properties-Uniform distribution-exponential distribution. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Stochastic Processes and Markov Chains: Introduction to Stochastic processes- Markov 
process. Transition Probability, Transition Probability Matrix, First order and Higher order 
Markov  process,  step  transition  probabilities,  Markov  chain,  Steady  state  condition, 
Markov analysis. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Multivariate Distribution Theory: Multivariate Normal distribution – Properties, 
Distributions of linear combinations, independence, marginal distributions, conditional 
distributions, Partial and Multiple correlation coefficient. Moment generating function. 
Bayesian Inference and its Applications: Statistical tests and Bayesian model comparison, 
Bit, Surprisal, Entropy, Source coding theorem, Joint entropy, Conditional entropy, Kullback- 
Leibler divergence. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Optimization: Unconstrained optimization, Necessary and sufficiency conditions for optima, 
Gradient descent methods, Constrained optimization, KKT conditions, Introduction to non- 
gradient techniques, Introduction to least squares optimization, Optimization view of machine 
learning. Data Science Methods: Linear regression as an exemplar function approximation 
problem, linear classification problems. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Apply logical thinking to problem-solving in context. 
2.   Employ methods related to these concepts in a variety of data science applications. 
3.   Use appropriate technology to aid problem-solving and data analysis. 
4.   The Bayesian process of inference in probabilistic reasoning system. 
5.   Demonstrate skills in unconstrained optimization. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Mathematics for Machine Learning by A. Aldo Faisal, Cheng Soon Ong, and Marc 
Peter Deisenroth. 
2.   Dr. B.S Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, 45th Edition, Khanna Publishers. 
3.   S. D. Sharma, Operations Research, Kedarnath and Ramnath Publishers, Meerut, 
Delhi. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Operations Research, An Introduction, Hamdy A. Taha, Pearson publishers. 
2. A Probabilistic Theory of Pattern Recognition by Luc Devroye, Laszlo Gyorfi, 
Gabor Lugosi. 
3. S C Gupta and V K Kapoor, Fundamentals of Mathematical statistics, Khanna publications. 
 
 
SOTT3402l TRANSFORMS AND BOUNDARY VALUE PROBLEMS L   T   P  C 
         3   0   0   3 
 
 Prerequisite: Engineering Mathematics 
Course Description: 
This course aims at providing the student to acquire the knowledge on the partial differential 
equations and transforms. The student develops the idea of analytical ability in solving 
boundary value problems and transform techniques. 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1.   Enlighten the learners in the concept of partial differential equations. 
2.   Furnish the learners with basic concepts and techniques at plus two level to lead them into 
advanced level by handling various real-world applications. 
3.   To have thorough knowledge in Fourier series. 
4.   Gain good knowledge in the application of Fourier Transforms. 
5.   Learn about Z- transforms and its applications. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Partial Differential Equations: Formation of partial differential equations by elimination of 
arbitrary constants and arbitrary functions – Solution of first order PDEs by Lagrange’s 
method- Solution of non-linear PDEs (Standard forms). 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Applications of Partial Differential Equations: Solution of second order PDEs by Method 
of separation of variables – Solutions of one-dimensional wave equation, one dimensional heat 
equation under initial and boundary conditions. 
 
 
UNIT-III 9 Hrs 
Fourier Series: Determination of Fourier coefficients (Euler’s) – Dirichlet conditions for the 
existence of Fourier series -Fourier series of Even and odd functions – Half-range Fourier sine 
and cosine expansions. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Fourier Transforms: Fourier integral theorem (only statement) – Fourier sine and cosine 
integrals. Fourier transform – Fourier sine and cosine transforms – Properties – Inverse 
transforms – Finite Fourier transforms. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Z-Transforms: z-transform – Inverse z-transform – Properties – Damping rule – Shifting rule – Initial and final value theorems. Convolution theorem – Solution of difference equations by 
z-transforms. 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Formulate/solve/classify the solutions of Partial differential equations. 
2.   Find the solution of one-dimensional wave equation and heat equation. 
3.   Evaluate the Fourier series expansion of periodic functions. 
4.   Understand the usage of Fourier Transforms. 
5.   Apply z-transforms to solve difference equations. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 10/e, John Wiley & Sons, 
2011. 
2.   B. S. Grewal, “Higher engineering mathematics”, Khanna publishers, New edition. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Dennis G. Zill and Warren S. Wright, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Jones 
and Bartlett, 2011. 
2.   Sankara Rao, “Introduction to Partial Differential Equations”, 2nd Edition, PHI 
Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2006. 
3.   B. V. Ramana, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Mc Graw Hill Education. 
 
SOTT3402m OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUES L   T   P  C 
                        3   0   0   3 
 
                  Prerequisite: None 
Course Description: 
This course introduces different mathematical concepts in optimization techniques. The 
objective of the course is to provide the basic tools of operations research in solving the 
engineering problems through optimization techniques their basic concepts, principles, linear 
programming and queuing theory. This course studies with strong math background to improve 
Strong analytics skills that needed. 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1.   To impart the basic concepts of modelling, models and statements of the operations 
research. 
2.   Formulate and solve linear programming problem/situations. 
3.   To solve transportation problems to minimize cost. 
4.   Describe various methods to find an optimal sequence of jobs to reduce makespan. 
5.   Apply Queuing theory to solve problems of traffic congestion, birth and death process, etc. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Introduction to Operations Research: OR definition - Classification of Models, modeling – 
Methods of solving OR Models, limitations and applications of OR models. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Linear programming problems (LPP): Problem Formulation-Graphical method-Simplex 
method-Big M Method-Dual simplex method. 
 
 
UNIT-III 9 Hrs 
Transportation Problem: Formulation of transportation problem, types, initial basic feasible 
solution  using  North-West  Corner  rule,  Vogel’s  Approximation  method,  Optimality  in 
Transportation problem by Modified Distribution (MODI) method. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Sequencing: Job sequencing, Johnsons Algorithm for n Jobs and Two machines, n Jobs and 
Three Machines, n jobs through m machines, Two jobs and m Machines Problems. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Queuing Theory: Introduction, Terminology, Pure Birth and Death process, M/M/1 and 
M/M/S model and simple problems. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Develop mathematical models for practical problems. 
2.   Apply linear programming to transportation problems. 
3.   Formulate practical problems given in words into a mathematical model. 
4.   Understand an optimal solution in assignment jobs, give transportation of items from 
sources to destinations. 
5.   Able to analyse the Queuing theory problems and draw appropriate inferences. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Sharma S.D., Operations Research: Theory, Methods and Applications, 15th Edition, 
Kedar Nath Ram Nath, 2010. 
2.   Rao S.S, “Optimization – Theory and applications”, Wiley Easter Ltd., 1979. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   David G. Luerbeggan, “Introduction to Linear and Non-Linear Programming”, Addison 
Wesley Publishing Co. 1973. 
2.   Cordan C.C. Beveridge and Robert S. Schedther, “Optimization, Theory and Practice” 
McGraw Hill Co.1970. 
3.   Hamdy A. Taha, Operations Research, An Introduction, Pearson publishers. 
 
SOTT3402n INFORMATION SECURITY L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
                       Prerequisite: Computer Networks, Operating Systems, Database Management System 
Course Description: 
This course offers complete coverage of all aspects of computer security, including users, 
software, devices, operating systems, database, networks and privacy issues. Reflecting rapidly 
evolving attacks and countermeasures, it introduces up-to-the-minute best practices for 
authenticating users, preventing malicious code execution, using encryption, protecting 
privacy, implementing firewalls, detecting intrusions and more. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To learn various threats and attacks in a network. 
2. To understand and explore fundamental techniques in developing secure applications. 
3. To analyze various authentication and access control mechanisms. 
4. To learn various methodologies for securing information systems ranging from operating 
systems to database management systems and to applications. 
5. To understand various privacy issues and policies 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Information Security Concepts: Information Security - Computer Security - Threats - Harm - Vulnerabilities - Program Security - Malicious code - Malwares: Viruses, Trojan Horses and 
Worms - Counter measures. Authentication and Access Control: Authentication - Key 
management schemes - Hierarchical Key Management Techniques -Security Standards - User 
Authentication Protocols - Implementing Access Controls - Access Control Models - Role 
Based Access Control - Attribute Based Access Control - Attribute based Encryption in 
Information Storage - Physical Access Controls. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Operating Systems Security: Security in Operating System - Security in the design of OS: 
Simplified Design, Layered Design, Kernelized design, Reference Monitor, Trusted Systems, 
Trusted Systems Functions - Trusted Operating System Design - Rootkit. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Security Countermeasures: Design of Firewalls - Types - Personal Firewalls - Configurations - Network Address Translation - Data Loss Prevention - Intrusion Detection and Prevention 
Systems: Types of IDSs, Intrusion Prevention system, Intrusion Response, Goals of IDSs, 
Strength and Limitations. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Database Security: Database Security - Database Security Requirements - Reliability and 
Integrity - Sensitive Data - Types of Disclosures - Preventing Disclosures - Inference - 
Multilevel Databases - Multilevel Security - Database Attacks - SQL Injection Attacks. 
Web Security: Browser Attacks: Types, Failed Identification and Authentication - Misleading 
and Malicious Web Contents - Protection against Malicious Web Pages - Website Data: Code 
within Data, Cross Site Scripting Attacks - Prevention of Data Attacks - Fake e-mails - Spam 
Detection - Phishing Attacks - Phishing URL Detection and Prevention. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Privacy Issues: Privacy Concepts: Aspects of Information Privacy, Computer-Related Privacy 
Problems -Threats to Personal Data Privacy -  People-Based Privacy Concerns - Privacy 
Principles and Policies - Individual Actions to Protect Privacy - Governments and Privacy - 
Identify Theft - Privacy issues on the Web Data - Application of Cryptographic Techniques for 
Privacy Preservation. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Apply fundamental knowledge on key security concepts, access control and 
authentication. 
2. Comprehend the use of security techniques for securing the information. 
3. Differentiate the needs and application of security in Operating System and Firewalls. 
4. Apply various data privacy policies in different areas of web based security systems. 
5. Analyze various privacy principles and policies. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Charles P. Pfleeger, Shari Lawrence Pfleeger, Jonathan Margulies, Security in Computing, 
2018, Fifth Edition, Pearson, New York. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Mark Stamp, Information Security: Principles and Practice, 2021, 3rd Edition, Wiley. 
2. Joanna Lyn Grama, Legal and Privacy Issues in Information Security, 2020, 3rd Edition, 
Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Inc. 
 
SOTT3402o ETHICAL HACKING L   T   P C 
  3   0   0   3 
                   Prerequisite: Computer Networks 
Course Description : 
Ethical Hacking is one of the most popular courses with the increase in people's interest in 
internet security and ways for keeping one's personal security safe and secure from different 
peoples. This course cover tools and techniques that are used by hackers and penetration testers 
and topics in general namely Ethical Hacking, Website, System Hacking & Security and 
Mobile & Wireless Security. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to, 
1.   To learn about the importance of information security. 
2.   To learn different scanning and enumeration methodologies and tools. 
3.   To understand various hacking techniques and attacks. 
4.   To be exposed to programming languages for security professionals. 
5.   To get familiarized with the different phases in penetration testing. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Introduction to Hacking: Introduction to Hacking – Importance of Security – Elements of 
Security – Phases of an Attack – Types of Hacker Attacks – Hacktivism – Vulnerability 
Research – Introduction to Footprinting – Information Gathering Methodology – Footprinting 
Tools – WHOIS Tools – DNS Information Tools – Locating the Network Range – Meta Search 
Engines. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Scanning and Enumeration: Introduction to Scanning – Objectives – Scanning Methodology – Tools – Introduction to Enumeration – Enumeration Techniques – Enumeration Procedure – 
Tools. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
System Hacking: Introduction – Cracking Passwords – Password Cracking Websites – 
Password Guessing – Password Cracking Tools – Password Cracking Counter measures – 
Escalating Privileges –Executing Applications –Keyloggers and Spyware. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Programming for Security Professionals: Programming Fundamentals – C language – 
HTML – Perl – Windows OS Vulnerabilities – Tools for Identifying Vulnerabilities – 
Countermeasures – Linux OS Vulnerabilities – Tools for Identifying Vulnerabilities – 
Countermeasures. 
UNIT V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Penetration Testing: Introduction – Security Assessments – Types of Penetration Testing- 
Phases of Penetration Testing – Tools – Choosing Different Types of Pen-Test Tools – 
Penetration Testing Tools. 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of this course, the student should be able to, 
1.   Understand how to secure the information. 
2.   Defend hacking attacks and protect data assets. 
3.   Defend a computer against a variety of security attacks using various tools. 
4.   Practice and use safe techniques on the World Wide Web. 
5.   Get familiarized with the different phases in penetration testing. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Ec-Council, “Ethical Hacking and Countermeasures: Attack Phases”, Delmar Cengage 
Learning,2009. 
2.   Michael T. Simpson, Kent Backman, James E. Corley, “Hands-On Ethical Hacking and 
Network Defense”, Cengage Learning, 2012. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Patrick  Engebretson,  “The  Basics  of  Hacking  and  Penetration  Testing  –  Ethical 
Hacking and Penetration Testing Made Easy”, Syngress Media, Second Revised 
Edition, 2013. 
2.   Jon Erickson, “Hacking: The Art of Exploitation”, No Starch Press, Second Edition, 
2008. 
3.   Daniel G. Graham, Ethical Hacking: A Hands-on Introduction to Breaking In, William 
Pollock, 2021. 
 
SOTT3402p INTERNET OF THINGS L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
                   Prerequisite: Computer Network  
Course Description: 
Internet of Things is a course that deals with the study of how devices are connected and how it 
helps to stay connected over the Internet. The course teaches individuals how the Internet of 
Things is helpful in our daily lives and how to stay connected over the Internet. 
 
Course Objectives:  
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To impart knowledge on the infrastructure, sensor technologies  
2. To gain knowledge of networking technologies of Internet of Things. 
3. To analyse, design and develop solutions for Internet of Things.  
4. To explore the real-life aspects of Internet of Things. 
5. To provide exposure to the IoT data processing and storage 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
IoT Fundamentals: Definition and Characteristics of Internet of Things (IoT) - Challenges and 
Issues - Physical Design of IoT - Logical Design of IoT - IoT Functional Blocks. 
IoT Communication Architectures and Protocols : Control Units – Communication modules – Bluetooth – Zigbee – WiFi – GPS - IoT Protocols (IPv6, 6LoWPAN, RPL, CoAP) – MQTT - 
Wired Communication - Power Sources. 
UNIT II                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Technologies Behind IoT : Four pillars of IoT paradigm: RFID, Wireless Sensor Networks, 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) - M2M - IoT Enabling Technologies: 
Bigdata Analytics, Cloud Computing, Embedded Systems 
UNIT III                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Resource Management in IoT:  Network Configuration Protocol, Open vSwitch Database 
Management Protocol - Routing and Protocols: Collection Tree, LOADng. 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
IoT to Web of Things: Scope of Web of Things (WoT) – IoT Data Management: Set up cloud 
environment, Cloud access from sensors, Data Analytics Platforms for IOT- Resource 
Identification: Richardson Maturity Model - REST API. 
 
  
UNIT V                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
IoT Data Processing and Storage: Time Series Data and their characteristics, time series 
databases, basic time series analytics, data summarization and sketching, dealing with noisy and 
missing data, anomaly and outlier detection. 
  
Course Outcomes:  
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Understand the fundamentals of IoT, its applications. 
2. Understand and analyze various tools for design of IoT system. 
3. Analyze the Raspberry Pi tool and its features.  
4. Deploy an IoT application and connect to the cloud.  
5. Build smart devices using IoT  
 
Text Books: 
1. Samuel Greengard, The Internet of Things, MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series, 2015 
2. Sharma, L., & Carpenter, M. (Eds.). (2022). Computer Vision and Internet of Things: 
Technologies and Applications. CRC Press. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Ben Fry, Visualizing Data-Exploring and Explaining Data with the Processing 
Environment, O'Reilly Media, 2008.  
2. Andrew K Dennis, Raspberry Pi Computer Architecture Essentials, Packt Publishing, 
2016 
3. Mangla, M., Kumar, A., Mehta, V., Bhushan, M., & Mohanty, S. N. (Eds.). (2022). Real
life applications of the Internet of Things: Challenges, applications, and advances. 
 
 
SOTT3402q EMBEDDED SYSTEMS L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
                 Prerequisite: Basic Programming Skills 
Course Description: 
This course emphasizes on comprehensive treatment of embedded hardware and real time 
operating systems along with case studies, in tune with the requirements of Industry. The 
objective of this course is to enable the students to understand embedded-system programming 
and apply that knowledge to design and develop embedded solutions. 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To understand the architecture of embedded processors, microcontrollers and 
Peripheral devices 
 
2.   To learn programming the embedded processor in assembly 
 
3.   To understand the challenges in developing operating systems for embedded systems 
 
4.   To learn programming the embedded systems in high level language such as C 
 
5.   To understand the Real time operating systems 
 
 
 
UNIT I 9Hrs 
Introduction To Embedded System: Components of Embedded System – Classification - 
Characteristic of embedded system Microprocessors & Micro controllers- Introduction to 
embedded processors - Embedded software architectures: Simple control loop - Interrupt 
controlled system - Cooperative multitasking - Preemptive multitasking or multi-threading - 
Micro kernels and kernels - Monolithic kernels - Exotic custom operating systems. 
 
 
UNIT II 9Hrs 
Embedded Hardware Architecture: ARM 2 TDMI core based 32 Bit microcontrollers and 
family of processors, Register, Memory and Data transfer, Arithmetic and Logic instructions, 
Assembly Language, I/O operations interrupt structure, ARM cache. ARM Bus, Embedded 
systems with ARM. 
 
 
UNIT III 9Hrs 
Real Time Operating Systems: Tasking Models, Task States, Services and Transitions - Real- 
Time Scheduling Algorithms: Round-Robin, FIFO, Priority-Based Preemptive Scheduling - 
Rate-Monotonic Scheduling - Priority Inversion and Priority Ceiling - Deadlocks - Process 
Synchronization – IPC - Shared Memory, Memory Locking, Memory Allocation - Signals – 
Semaphore Flag or mutex as Resource key – Message Queues – Mailboxes – Pipes – Virtual 
Sockets. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9Hrs 
Software Development: Embedded Programming in C and C++ - Source Code Engineering 
Tools for Embedded C/C++ - Program Modeling Concepts in Single and Multiprocessor 
Systems - Software Development Process - Software Engineering Practices in the Embedded 
Software Development – Hardware / Software Co-design in an Embedded System 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                      9Hrs 
Study of Micro C/OS-II: RTOS System Level Functions – Task Service Functions Time 
Delay Functions – Memory Allocation Related Functions – Semaphore Related Functions 
Mailbox Related Functions – Queue Related Functions – Case Studies of Programming with 
RTOS. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course , the students will be able to : 
1. Understand the embedded systems 
2. Learn the embedded systems Architecture 
3. Understand the embedded systems programming 
4. Learn about the real time operating systems 
5. Understand the concept on micro-C 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Rajkamal, "Embedded System: Architecture, Programming and Design" Tata McGraw- Hill, 
2003. 
2. Wayne Wolf, “Computers as Components – Principles of Embedded Computing System 
Design”, Harcourt India Pvt. Ltd., Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, First Indian Reprint, 2001. 
 
 
References: 
1. Steve Heath, “Embedded Systems Design”, Newnes, Second edition, 2003. 
2. Noergaard, “Embedded System Architecture”, Elsevier India Private Limited, 2005 
3.  Sriram  Iyer  and  Pankaj  Gupta,  “Embedded  Real  Time  Systems  Programming”,  Tata 
McGraw-Hill, 2004 
 
SOTT3402r GREEN COMPUTING L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
                   Prerequisite: None 
Course Description: 
Green computing (also known as green IT or sustainable IT) is the design, manufacture, use 
and disposal of computers, chips, other technology components and peripherals in a way that 
limits the harmful impact on the environment, including reducing carbon emissions and the 
energy consumed by manufacturers data centers end-users. Green computing also encompasses 
choosing sustainably sourced raw materials, reducing electronic waste and promoting 
sustainability through the use of renewable resources. 
 
 
Course objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1.   To learn the fundamentals of Green Computing. 
2.   To analyze the Green computing Grid Framework. 
3.   To explore and analyze optimization issues 
4.   To understand the issues related with Green compliance. 
5.   To study and develop various case studies. 
 
               UNIT I 9Hrs 
 
Fundamentals: Green IT Fundamentals: Business, IT, and the Environment – Green 
computing: carbon foot print, scoop on power – Green IT Strategies: Drivers, Dimensions, and 
Goals – Environmentally Responsible Business: Policies, Practices, and Metrics. 
 
               UNIT II 9Hrs 
 
Green assets and modelling: Green Assets: Buildings, Data Centers, Networks, and Devices – Green Business Process Management: Modeling, Optimization, and Collaboration – Green 
Enterprise Architecture – Environmental Intelligence – Green Supply Chains – Green 
Information Systems: Design and Development Models. 
 
               UNIT III 9 Hrs 
 
Grid framework: Virtualization of IT systems – Role of electric utilities, Telecommuting, 
teleconferencing and teleporting – Materials recycling – Best ways for Green PC – Green Data 
center – Green Grid framework. 
 
              UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
 
Green Compliance: Socio-cultural aspects of Green IT – Green Enterprise Transformation 
Roadmap – Green Compliance: Protocols, Standards, and Audits – Emergent Carbon Issues: 
Technologies and Future.
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
 
Case study: The Environmentally Responsible Business Strategies (ERBS) – Case Study 
Scenarios for Trial Runs – Case Studies – Applying Green IT Strategies and Applications to a 
Home, Hospital, Packaging Industry and Telecom Sector. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1.   Acquire knowledge to adopt green computing practices to minimize negative impacts on 
the environment. 
2.    Enhance the skill in energy saving practices in their use of hardware. 
3.   Able to apply optimization in various fields 
4.   Evaluate technology tools that can reduce paper waste and carbon footprint by the 
stakeholders. 
5.   Understand the ways to minimize equipment disposal requirements. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Bhuvan   Unhelkar,   ―Green   IT   Strategies   and   Applications-Using   Environmental 
Intelligence‖,                       CRC                       Press,                       June                       2014. 
2. Woody Leonhard, Katherine Murray, ―Green Home computing for dummies‖, August 
2012. 
 
 
References Books: 
1. Alin Gales, Michael Schaefer, Mike Ebbers, Green Data Center: steps for the Journey, 
Shroff/IBM rebook, 2011. 
2.      John Lamb, The      Greening      of      IT, Pearson      Education,      2009. 
3. Jason Harris, ―Green Computing and Green IT- Best Practices on regulations & industry, 
Lulu.com, 2008 
4. Carl speshocky, ―Empowering Green Initiatives with IT, John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
5. Wu Chun Feng (editor), ―Green computing: Large Scale energy efficiency, CRC Press 
 
SOTT3402s CLOUD SECURITY L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
 
Prerequisite: Cloud Computing, Network Security 
Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive exploration of cloud security, encompassing 
architecture, infrastructure, data, applications, and operations in cloud computing 
environments. We will gain proficiency in managing cloud security, mitigating risks, and 
ensuring resource integrity and availability and also equipped to safeguard cloud assets and 
conduct secure operations within a cloud-driven landscape. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Understand  Cloud  Security  Fundamentals  and  shared  responsibilities  between  cloud 
providers and customers. 
2.   Learn strategies for securing data in cloud storage, encryption techniques for different 
service models, and effective management of encryption keys. 
3.   Implement Application Security and Explore secure software development lifecycles, 
testing methods for cloud applications and integration of DevOps. 
4.   Gain  insights  into  cloud  provider  selection,  incident  response  protocols,  and  the 
fundamentals of Security as a Service (SECaaS). 
5.   Understand the importance of governance, risk management, legal considerations, and 
compliance in cloud environments. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Cloud  Architecture  and  Infrastructure  Security  for  Cloud:  Introduction  to  Cloud 
Computing, Introduction & Cloud Architecture, Cloud Essential Characteristics, Cloud Service 
Models, Cloud Deployment Models, Shared Responsibilities, Intro to Infrastructure Security 
for  Cloud  Computing,  Software  Defined  Networks,  Cloud  Network  Security,  Securing 
Compute Workloads, Management Plane Security, Disaster Recovery (BCDR). 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Managing Cloud Security and Risk: Introduction, Governance, Managing Cloud Security 
Risk, Compliance, Legal Issues in Cloud, Audit, CSA Tools. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Data Security for Cloud Computing: Introduction, Cloud Data Storage, Securing Data in the 
Cloud, Encryption For IaaS, Encryption For PaaS & SaaS, Encryption Key Management, Other 
Data Security Options, Data Security Lifecycle 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Application  Security  and  Management  for  Cloud  Computing:  Introduction,  Secure 
Software  Development  Life  Cycle  (SSDLC),  Testing  &  Assessment,  DevOps,  Secure 
Operations, Identity & Access Management Definitions, IAM Standards. 
 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Cloud Security Operations: Introduction, Selecting A Cloud Provider, Incident Response, 
SECaaS Fundamentals, SECaaS Categories & Recommendations. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Understand fundamental concepts of cloud computing, including architecture, essential 
characteristics, service models, and deployment models. 
2.   Implement data security strategies in cloud environments, including securing data storage, 
encryption, and key management. 
3.   Apply secure software development practices, testing, and DevOps integration to ensure 
application security in the cloud. 
4.   Analyse and Implement cloud security operations effectively, including selecting a cloud 
provider, incident response, and utilizing Security as a Service solutions. 
5.   Demonstrate an understanding of governance, risk management, legal considerations, and 
compliance requirements specific to cloud computing. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   CCSP Certified Cloud Security Professional Official Study Guide, Ben Malisow, Dan 
Meuller, Brandon Carroll, Sybex. 
2.   Cloud Security and Privacy: An Enterprise Perspective on Risks and Compliance, Tim 
Mather, Subra Kumaraswamy, Shahed Latif, O'Reilly Media, 2009. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Cloud Computing: Concepts, Technology & Architecture, Thomas Erl, Ricardo Puttini, 
Zaigham Mahmood, Prentice Hall, 1st edition, 2013. 
2.   Cloud Security: A Comprehensive Guide to Secure Cloud Computing, Ronald L. Krutz, 
Russell Dean Vines, Wiley, 1st edition, 2010. 
 
SOTT3402t DevNet L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
Prerequisite: Computer Networks 
Course Description: 
The course emphasizes essential network fundamentals, including networking protocols and 
devices, and explores application deployment and security. Through hands-on experiences, 
learners will delve into DevNet developer environments, software design, and API integration. 
With a focus on infrastructure automation, we will master scripting, tools, and concepts to 
manage network programmability, device models, and security platforms and also, we will be 
equipped with the skills to thrive in the dynamic world of DevNet development and network 
automation. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Understand the DevNet environment, online resources, and principles of software design. 
2.   Explore different API design and architecture styles. 
3.  Develop a foundational understanding of network principles, from network interface to 
internetwork layers. 
4.   Understand network considerations for application development and delve into securing 
applications. 
5.   Acquire skills in basic scripting, automation tools, Infrastructure as Code (IaC), testing 
automation, and network simulation. Understand the fundamental differences between 
blockchain, distributed ledger technology, and distributed databases. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
DevNet  Developer  Environment  and  Software  Development  and  Design:  DevNet 
Overview, Exploring DevNet Online Resources, Software Development and Design, Version 
Control, Coding Basics, Code Review and Testing, Understanding Data Formats. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs): Introducing APIs, API Design Styles, API 
Architecture Styles, Introduction to REST APIs, authenticating to a REST API, API Rate 
Limits, Working with Webhooks, Troubleshooting API Calls. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Network Fundamentals: Introduction to Network Fundamentals, Network Interface Layer, 
Internetwork Layer, Network Devices, Networking Protocols, Troubleshooting Application 
Connectivity Issues. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Application Deployment and Security: Understanding Deployment Choices with Different 
Models, Creating and Deploying a Sample Application, Continuous Integration/Continuous 
Deployment  (CI/CD),  Networks  for  Application  Development  and  Security,  Securing 
Applications. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Infrastructure  and  Automation:  Automating  Infrastructure  with  Standard  Networking, 
DevOps and SRE, Basic Automation Scripting, Automation Tools, Infrastructure as Code, 
Automating  Testing,  Network  Simulation,  Understanding  Network  Programmability  and 
Device Models, Network Management, Security Platforms. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Establish a development environment within DevNet, understanding version control, 
coding practices, and design principles. 
2.  Design and integrate APIs effectively, troubleshoot connectivity issues, and utilize 
webhooks for seamless application integration. 
3.  Demonstrate proficiency in network fundamentals, identifying layers, devices, and 
protocols, while addressing common connectivity challenges. 
4. Deploy    applications    with    different    models,    implement    continuous 
integration/deployment, consider network implications, and apply security measures. 
5.   Automate infrastructure tasks using scripting and tools, create Infrastructure as Code 
(IaC), simulate networks, and manage network devices while prioritizing security 
considerations. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Cisco  Certified  DevNet  Associate  DEVASC  200-901  Official  Cert  Guide,  Patrick 
Gargano, Anthony Sequeira, Pearson IT Certification Publisher, 2020 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies: A Comprehensive Introduction, Arvind 
Narayanan, Joseph Bonneau, Edward Felten, Andrew Miller and Steven Goldfeder, 
Princeton University Press, 2016. 
2. Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital Cryptocurrencies, Andreas M. Antonopoulos, 
O’Reilly Media Inc, 2015. 
 
SOTT3402u ADVANCED COMPUTER NETWORKS L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
Prerequisite: Computer Networks 
Course Description: 
This course offers a comprehensive exploration of networking essentials with a focus on device 
configuration, switching, VLANs, network security, and wireless LANs (WLANs). We will 
gain the knowledge and skills necessary to configure devices, optimize network performance, 
ensure security, and manage wireless networks. The course aims to equip a solid foundation in 
networking principles, enabling them to design, configure, and troubleshoot network 
environments effectively. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Develop the ability to configure switches and routers with initial settings, implement secure 
remote access, and verify network connectivity. 
2.   Understand the concept  of VLANs, configure VLANs in multi-switch environments, 
perform VLAN trunking, and troubleshoot inter-VLAN routing. 
3.   Comprehend the role of STP in network redundancy, configure EtherChannel for enhanced 
network capacity, and troubleshoot STP-related issues. 
4.   Learn to secure LANs through endpoint security, access control, and mitigation of Layer 2 
security threats, including MAC address table attacks. 
5.   Acquire skills in managing WLAN components, understanding WLAN operation, securing 
WLANs, and deploying secure and efficient wireless networks. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Device Configuration and Switching: Configure a Switch with Initial Settings, Configure 
Switch Ports, Secure Remote Access, Basic Router Configuration, Verify Directly Connected 
Networks, Frame Forwarding, Switching Domains 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
VLANs:   Overview   of   VLANs,   VLANs   in   a   Multi-Switched   Environment,   VLAN 
Configuration, VLAN Trunks, Dynamic Trunking Protocol, Inter-VLAN Routing Operation, 
Router-on-a-Stick  Inter-VLAN  Routing,  Inter-VLAN  Routing  using  Layer  3  Switches, 
Troubleshoot Inter-VLAN Routing. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
STP, EtherChannel and DHCPv4: Purpose of STP, STP Operations, Evolution of STP, 
EtherChannel Operation, Configure EtherChannel, Verify and Troubleshoot EtherChannel, 
DHCPv4 Concepts, Configure DHCPv4 Server, Configure DHCPv4 Client, IPv6 Global 
Unicast Address Assignment, SLAAC, DHCPv6, Configure DHCPv6 Server. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
FHRP, LAN Security and Switch Security:   First   Hop   Redundancy   Protocol,   HSRP, 
Endpoint Security, Access Control, Layer 2 Security Threats, MAC Address Table Attack, 
LAN Attacks, Implement Port Security, Mitigate VLAN 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
WLAN: Introduction to Wireless, Components of WLANs, WLAN Operation, CAPWAP 
Operation, Channel Management, WLAN Threats, , Secure WLANs, WLAN Configuration, 
Routing Concepts, IP Static Routing. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Demonstrate  the  configure  switches,  routers,  and  ports,  ensuring  optimal  network 
performance. 
2.   Implement VLANs and Trunking: Successfully create and manage VLANs, configure 
trunking, and troubleshoot inter-VLAN routing challenges. 
3.   Implement  Spanning  Tree  Protocol  (STP)  for  network  redundancy  and  configure 
EtherChannel for enhanced capacity. 
4.   Implement access control measures, mitigate Layer 2 security threats, and safeguard 
LANs from unauthorized access. 
5.   Deploy secure wireless LANs, manage WLAN components, and understand WLAN 
operation, security, and deployment. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   CCNA 200-301 Official Cert Guide, Volume 1, Wendell Odom, Cisco Press 
2.   CCNA Routing and Switching Complete Deluxe Study Guide, by Todd Lammle, Sybex 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Computer   Networking:   Principles,   Protocols   and   Practice,   Olivier   Bonaventure, 
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 1st Edition, 2014 
2.   Computer Networks: A Systems Approach, Larry L. Peterson and Bruce S. Davie, 
Morgan Kaufmann, 5th Edition, 2011. 
3.   Network Security Essentials: Applications and Standards, William Stallings, Pearson, 7th 
Edition, 2021. 
4.   Routing and Switching Essentials Companion Guide, Cisco Networking Academy, Cisco 
Press, 1st Edition, 2013 
SOTT3402v NETWORK SECURITY L  T  P  C 
 3  0   0  3 
Prerequisite: Computer Networks 
Course Description:  
This course covers different types of attacks on networks, principles of cryptography: 
Symmetric Key Cryptography, Public Key Cryptography, Message Integrity, Cryptographic 
Hash Functions, Authentication, Digital Signatures, Certificates, Firewalls and Intrusion 
Detection Systems. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To acquire knowledge on standard algorithms used to provide confidentiality, integrity 
and authenticity. 
2.   To understand various cipher techniques. 
3.   To explore the various key distribution and management schemes. 
4.   To learn how to deploy encryption techniques to secure data in transit across data 
networks. 
5.   To learn different attacks and system security approaches. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Basics of Cryptography: The OSI Security Architecture -Services, mechanisms and attacks - 
A Model for network security – Classical encryption technique – Symmetric cipher model – 
Substitution technique – Rotor machines – Steganography. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Data Encryption: Stream Cipher - SDES - Block cipher principles – The Data Encryption 
Standard – The strength of DES – Advanced Encryption Standard - Triple DES. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Key Distribution and Key Management: Random key generation- Requirements - Linear 
Congruential  generators-  Blum  Blum  Shub  generator  Placement  of  encryption  -  Traffic 
confidentiality – Key distribution- Public key cryptography and RSA – Key Management - 
Diffie-hellman Key exchange. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Network Protection, Monitoring, Detection, Authentication: Firewalls, packet filter and 
stateful firewalls, application aware firewalls, personal firewalls- Intrusion Detection System- 
Honeypots - Authentication requirements – Authentication functions – message authentication 
codes – Hash functions – Security of hash functions and MAC‘S – MD 5 (Message Digest 
Algorithm) – HMAC. Digital Signatures and authentication protocols: Digital Signatures – 
Authentication protocols – Digital Signature Standard – Kerberos – X.509 Authentication 
Service. 
UNIT V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Attacks and System Security: 
Unauthorized access - Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks- Man in the middle 
attacks- Code - SQL injection attacks- Privilege escalation- Insider threats- ARP Cache 
poisoning- MAC flooding, Side- channel attack- The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)- Pretty Good 
Privacy (PGP)- Email Security-Web Security-IP Security –Biometric Security. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course the student: 
1.   Able to explain the facts and fundamental ideas of symmetric encryption schemes. 
2.   Illustrate various encryption standards and its challenges in the network. 
3.   Experiment with key encryption mechanisms and key management strategies in new 
situations. 
4.   Design suitable network protection, monitoring and detection strategies that detect or 
prevent from the threat. 
5.   Design security strategies and resolve security issues in networks and computer systems 
to secure an organization / IT infrastructure. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   William Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, 8th 
Edition, Pearson edition, 2020. 
2. Behrouz A. Forouzan, Cryptography and Network Security, McGraw-Hill, 3rd Edition 
2015. 
Reference Books: 
1.   W.  Stallings,  Network  Security  Essentials:  Applications  and  Standards,6th  Edition, 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2016. 
2. Bryan  Sullivan  and  Vincent  Liu,  Web  Application  Security,  A  Beginner's  Guide, 
McGraw-Hill Education, 2012. 
3. C. Kaufman, R. Perlman and M. Speciner, Network Security: Private Communication in 
a Public World, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall PTR, 2002. 
 
SOTT3402w FAULT TOLERANT SYSTEMS L   T   P  C 
                Prerequisite:  Digital Logic Design 3   0   0   3 
Course Description: 
The purpose of this course is to establish fault tolerance as a measure to improve the 
dependability of systems in the presence of faults and correlate this dependability with the 
effects to the system and functional safety. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To create an understanding of the fundamental concepts of fault-tolerance 
2. To provide students with a working knowledge of the potential faults and errors occurring   
      in an embedded system. 
3. To provide knowledge in concepts of fault detection and fault tolerance. 
4. To provide knowledge in concepts of fault prevention and forecasting. 
5. To understand various fault – tolerant codes. 
 
UNIT I    9 Hrs 
Introduction: Definition of fault tolerance, Redundancy, Applications of fault- 
tolerance, Fundamentals of dependability. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Attributes: Reliability, availability, safety, Impairments: faults, errors and failures, Means: 
fault prevention, removal and forecasting 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Dependability Evaluation: Common measures: failures rate, mean time to failure, mean time 
to repair, etc. Reliability block diagrams, Markov processes. 
Hardware redundancy, Redundancy schemes, Evaluation and comparison, Applications, 
Information redundancy. 
 
 
UNIT IV     9 Hrs 
Codes:  linear, Hamming, cyclic, unordered, arithmetic, etc., Encoding and decoding 
techniques, Applications, Time redundancy 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Programming: Software fault tolerance, Specific features, Software fault tolerance technique 
s: N-version programming, recovery blocks, self-checking software, etc. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1.Understand the  concepts  of fault  detection, tolerance  and correction mechanisms  in real 
world scenarios. 
2.Ability to design and develop dependable systems for mission critical applications. 
3.Apply the mean time and mean time to repair 
4.Apply the Redundancy schemes 
5.Utilize the various Code Techniques 
 
 
Text Books: 
1 Anderson, T., and P.A. Lee, Fault-Tolerant Principles and Practices, Prentice-Hall 
2 Hwang, K., and F.A. Briggs, Computer Architecture and Parallel Processing, McGraw- 
Hill.Jalote, P. 
3. Fault-Tolerance in Distributed Systems, ISBN 0-13-301367-7, Prentice-Hall, 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Johnson, B.W., Design and Analysis of Fault-Tolerant Systems, Addison Wesely 
2. Leveson, Nancy G., Safeware, system safety and computers, Addison Wesely. 
3.  Pradhan,  D.K.,  Fault-Tolerant  Computing  —  Theory  and  Techniques,  (2  Volumes), 
Prentice-Hall. 
4.  Pradhan,  Dhiraj  K.,  Fault-Tolerant  Computer  System  Design,  ISBN  0-13-057887-8, 
Prentice-Hall PTR 
 
SOTT3402x COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE L   T   P  C 
               3   0   0   3 
Prerequisite: Artificial Intelligence 
Course Description: 
This course mainly designed to explore the principles, methods, and applications of artificial 
intelligence techniques inspired by natural systems. This course delves into the realm of 
intelligent systems that can learn, adapt, and make decisions based on data and experience. By 
fusing concepts from neural networks, fuzzy logic, evolutionary algorithms, and swarm 
intelligence, students will gain a comprehensive understanding of how these methods can solve 
complex problems in various domains. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Understand the core principles and theories of computational intelligence, including neural 
networks, fuzzy logic, evolutionary algorithms, and swarm intelligence. 
2.   Implementation and application of neural networks, fuzzy logic, evolutionary algorithms, 
and swarm intelligence to solve complex problems. 
3.   Develop the ability to identify real-world challenges suitable for computational intelligence 
approaches and apply these methods effectively for practical solutions. 
4.   Recognize the ethical implications of computational intelligence applications, including 
bias mitigation, transparency, and societal impact. 
5.   Learn to combine computational intelligence techniques creatively, fostering the design of 
innovative solutions across diverse domains. 
 
 
UNIT I 6 Hrs 
Introduction  to  Computational  Intelligence:  Computational  Intelligence,  Paradigms  of 
Computational  Intelligence,  Approaches  to  Computational  Intelligence,  Applications  of 
Computational Intelligence. 
 
 
UNIT II 12 Hrs 
Fuzzy Logic: Fuzzy sets, properties, membership functions, fuzzy operations. Fuzzification, 
Defuzzification and Inference Mechanism, Fuzzy Modelling, Fuzzy Control, Design of Fuzzy 
Controller Evolutionary Computation, constituent algorithms, Swarm intelligence algorithms, 
Overview of other bio-inspired algorithm, Hybrid approaches. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Neural  Network:  Biological  and  artificial  neuron,  Network  Architecture,  Activation 
Functions,  supervised  and  unsupervised  learning.  Single  layer  Perceptron,  Multilayer 
Perceptron,  Back  propagation  learning,  Hopfield  networks,  Bidirectional  Associative 
Memory. Topologically organized neural networks. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems and Hybrid Models: Evolutionary Adaptive Fuzzy Systems, 
Objective Functions and Evaluation, Fuzzy Adaptive Evolutionary Algorithms, Supportive 
Combinations, Collaborative Combinations. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Intelligence and Applications: Cooperative Neuro-Fuzzy Systems, Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy 
System, Natural language processing, Morphological Analysis, Language Models, Information 
Retrieval, Information Extraction, Machine Translation, Machine Learning, Symbol-Based 
Machine Learning. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Demonstrate  a  clear  understanding  of  computational  intelligence  paradigms, 
approaches, and their applications. 
2.  Designing and implementing fuzzy logic systems, including membership functions, 
fuzzification, defuzzification, and inference mechanisms and applying evolutionary 
computation techniques and hybrid approaches for problem-solving. 
3.   Constructing and training neural networks for various tasks. 
4.  Comprehend the concept of evolutionary adaptive fuzzy systems and utilize fuzzy 
adaptive evolutionary algorithms. 
5. Utilizing computational intelligence techniques and demonstrate applications of 
computer intelligence. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Computer Intelligence, Nazmul Siddique and Hojjat Adeli, John Wiley & Sons Inc 
Publications, 1/e, 2013., 
2.   Computational Intelligence: Principles, Techniques and Application, Konar A., Springer 
Verlag, 2005. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Neural Networks – A Classroom Approach, Kumar S, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004. 
2.   Fundamentals of Computational Swarm Intelligence, Engelbrecht, A.P, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2006. 
3.   Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications, Ross T J, McGraw Hill, 2002 
4.   Introduction to Evolutionary Computing, Eiben A E and Smith J E, Second Edition, 
Springer, Natural Computing Series, 2007. 
5.   Neuro – Fuzzy and Soft Computing, Jang J S R and Sun C T, Mizutani E, PHI, 2002. 
 
SOTT3402y DATA ANALYTICS WITH TABLEAU L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
Prerequisite: Data Analytics using Python 
Course Description: 
The course focuses on understanding fundamental concepts, utilizing Tableau's functionalities, 
and applying advanced visualization techniques to enhance quality insights. Students will learn 
data preparation, analysis, and effective visualization through real-world case studies, 
empowering them to make informed decisions and drive quality improvements. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand a strong foundation in data analytics concepts, business intelligence 
applications, and pattern recognition, fostering the ability to recognize valuable insights 
from data. 
2.   Acquire proficiency in using Tableau for data visualization and analysis, encompassing 
connecting to data sources. 
3.   Develop skills to manipulate data within Tableau, including connecting to different data 
sources, working with extracts. 
4.   Creating diverse visualizations like histograms, scatter plots, box plots, maps, and more, to 
enhance quality analysis insights. 
5. Applying data analytics to real-world quality case studies, thereby applying learned 
concepts in practical scenarios. 
 
 
UNIT I  9 Hrs 
Basic Concepts of Data Analytics: Business Intelligence Concepts and Applications, Pattern 
Recognition, Data Processing Chain, Data Warehousing: DW Architecture, Data Sources, Data 
Loading  Processes,  Data  Mining: Gathering  and  selecting  data,  Data  cleansing  and 
preparation,  Outputs  of  Data  Mining,  Evaluating  Data  Mining,  Results  Data  Mining, 
Techniques Tools and Platforms for Data Mining. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Tableau Fundamentals: Exploring Tableau, The cycle of analytics, Connecting to data, 
Foundations  for  building  visualizations,  Measures  and  dimensions,  Visualizing  data, 
Geographic visualizations, Dashboard interface. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Working with Data in Tableau: The Tableau paradigm, connecting to data, working with 
extracts instead of live connections, Tableau file types, Metadata and sharing connections, 
Joins and blends, Filtering data. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Advanced Visualization and Calculations: Stacked Bar Chart, Histogram, Butterfly Char, 
Donut Chart, Scatter Plot, Bubble Chart, Box Plot, Pareto Chart, Bump Chart, Maps, Gantt 
Chart, Adventure with Calculations, Diving Deep with Table Calculations. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Data Prep and Structuring: Cleaning and Structuring Messy Data, Introducing Tableau Prep, 
Case Studies: Red Wine Quality, Airline Passenger Satisfaction, Driverless Car Failure and 
Seoul Bike Sharing Demand. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Develop a  solid  foundation  in  data  analytics,  business  intelligence,  and  pattern 
recognition, enabling them to extract valuable insights from complex datasets. 
2.   Analysing and creating interactive dashboards and effectively communicating findings. 
3.   Apply data manipulation techniques within Tableau, such as connecting to various data 
sources, performing joins and blends, 
4.   Demonstrate their analytical skills by discerning complex patterns and trends in quality 
analysis data, contributing to in-depth insights and informed decision-making. 
5.   Integrate data analytics and visualization techniques into real-world quality case studies. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Data Analytics Made Accessible, Anil K. Maheshwari, 2023 e-book edition. 
2.   Learning Tableau, Joshua N. Milligan, 3rd Edition, Packt Publishing, 2019 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Data Analytics and Visualization in Quality Analysis using Tableau, Jaejin Hwang and 
Youngjin Yoon, CRC Press, 2022. 
2.   Mastering Tableau 2021, Marleen Meier and David Baldwin, 
Packt Publishing, 2021. 
 
SOTT3402z HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
                     Prerequisite: Software Engineering 
Course Description: 
This course introduces the fundamental theories and concepts of human-computer interaction 
(HCI). HCI is an interdisciplinary field that integrates theories and methodologies across many 
domains including cognitive psychology, neurocognitive engineering, computer science, 
human factors, and engineering design. Students will gain theoretical knowledge of and 
practical experience in the fundamental aspects of human perception, cognition, and learning 
as relates to the design, implementation, and evaluation of interfaces. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To provide the basic knowledge on the levels of interaction, design models, techniques, 
and validations focusing on the different aspects of human-computer interface and 
interactions 
2. To make the learners think in a design perspective and to evaluate interactive design 
3. To use the concepts and principles of HCI to analyze and propose solutions for real life 
applications 
4. To become familiar with recent technology trends 
5. To explore challenges in the HCI domain 
 
 
UNIT I      9  Hrs 
HCI Foundations: Input–output channels, Human memory, Thinking: reasoning and problem 
solving, Emotion, Individual differences, Psychology and the design of interactive systems, 
Text entry devices, Positioning, pointing and drawing, Display devices, Devices for virtual 
reality and 3D interaction, Physical controls, sensors and special devices 
 
 
UNIT II   9 Hrs 
Designing Interaction: Overview of Interaction Design Models, Discovery - Framework, 
Collection - Observation, Elicitation, Interpretation - Task Analysis, Storyboarding, Use Cases, 
Primary Stakeholder Profiles, Project Management Document 
 
 
UNIT III  9 Hrs 
Interaction Design Models: Model Human Processor - Working Memory, Long-Term 
Memory,  Processor  Timing,  Keyboard  Level  Model  -  Operators,  Encoding  Methods, 
Heuristics for M Operator Placement, What the Keyboard Level Model Does Not Model, 
Application  of  the  Keyboard  Level  Model,  GOMS  -  CMNGOMS  Analysis,  Modeling 
Structure, State Transition Networks - Three-State Model, Glimpse Model, Physical Models, 
Fitts’ Law 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Guide Lines in HCI : Shneideman's eight golden rules, Norman's Sever principles, Norman's 
model of interaction, Nielsen's ten heuristics, Heuristic evaluation, contextual evaluation, 
Cognitive walk-through 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Collaboration  And  Communication:  Face-to-face  Communication,  Conversation,  Text- 
based Communication, Group working, Dialog design notations, Diagrammatic notations, 
Textual dialog notations, Dialog semantics, Dialog analysis and design 
 
 
Course Outcome: 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Enumerate the basic concepts of human, computer interactions 
2. Create the processes of human-computer interaction life cycle 
3. Analyze and design the various interaction design models 
4. Apply the interface design standards/guidelines for evaluating the developed interactions 
5. Establish the different levels of communication across the application stakeholders 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   A Dix, Janet Finlay, G D Abowd, R Beale., Human-Computer Interaction, 3rd Edition, 
Pearson Publishers,2008 
2. Thomas S. Huang,” Real-Time Vision for Human-Computer Interaction”, Springer 5. 
Preece et al, Human-Computer Interaction, Addison-Wesley, 1994 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Shneiderman, Plaisant, Cohen and Jacobs, Designing the User Interface: Strategies for 
Effective Human Computer Interaction, 5th Edition, Pearson Publishers, 2010. 
2. Hans-Jorg Bullinger, ”Human-Computer Interaction”, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
Publishers 
3. Jakob Nielsen,”Advances in Human-computer Interaction”,Ablex Publishing Corporation 
 
BTST3602a  DEEP LEARNING L   T   P   C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
 
Prerequisite: Python Programming, Machine Learning 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to the fascinating field of deep learning, which is a subset of 
machine learning focused on neural networks and their applications. Students will learn about 
neural network architectures, training techniques, and various deep learning applications, 
preparing them for real-world projects and research opportunities. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Understand  the  fundamentals  of  deep  learning,  including  activation  functions  and 
Optimization Techniques. 
2.   Learn about the Neural Networks. 
3.   Learn and analysis the conventional neural networks. 
4.   Learn and analysis the recurrent neural networks. 
5.   Understand an image processing using DL algorithms 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Introduction to Deep Learning: Introduction to Deep Learning, Decision Surfaces, Deep 
Feed, Forward Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Back-Propagation and Other 
Differentiation Algorithms, Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), Heuristics for Avoiding Bad Local  
Minima,  Heuristics  for  Faster  Training,  Nestors  Accelerated  Gradient  Descent, 
Regularization  for  Deep  Learning,  Optimization  Techniques,  Gradient  Descent,  Batch 
Optimization. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Neural Network: Introduction to Neural Network, Multilayer Perceptron, Back Propagation 
Learning, Unsupervised Learning with Deep Network, Autoencoders. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Convolutional Neural Networks: Convolutional Neural Network, building blocks of CNN, 
CNN Architectures, Convolution, Pooling Layers, Transfer Learning, Image Classification 
using Transfer Learning, Revisiting Gradient Descent, Momentum Optimizer, RMSProp, 
Adam. Case study: Develop a simple application for Classify the animals by using CNN 
approach. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Recurrent Neural Networks: Recurrent and Recursive Nets – Recurrent Neural Networks – 
Deep Recurrent Networks – Recursive Neural Networks – Applications, Case study: Develop 
a simple application for Classify the cancer by using RNN approach. 
 
 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Image Processing using DL: Classical Supervised Tasks with Deep Learning, Image 
Denoising, Semantic Segmentation, Object Detection, LSTM Networks, Generative Modelling 
with DL, Case Study: Implement of any one deep learning algorithm with TensorFlow and 
Keras tools. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Understand the role of deep learning in machine learning applications. 
2.   Demonstrate the neural networks. 
3.   Design and implement convolutional neural networks. 
4.   Design and implement recurrent neural networks. 
5.   Demonstrate and Analysis the image processing in deep learning. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Deep Learning- Ian Goodfelllow, Yoshua Benjio, Aaron Courville, The MIT Press, 2017 
2.   Pattern Classification, Richard O. Duda, Peter E. Hart, David G. Stork, John Wiley & 
Sons Inc. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Deep Learning for Computer Vision, Rajalingappaa Shanmugamani, Packt Publishing, 
2018. 
2.   Matlab  Deep  Learning:  With  Machine  Learning,  Neural  Networks  and  Artificial 
Intelligence, Phil Kim, Apress, 2017. 
3.  Convolutional Neural Networks in Visual Computing, Ragav Venkatesan, Baoxin Li, 
CRC Press, 2018. 
4. Neural Network for Beginners: Build Deep Neural Networks and Develop Strong 
Fundamentals using Python’s NumPy, and Matplotlib, Sebastian Klaas, BPB 
Publications, 2021. 
 
BTST3602b Intrusion Detection System L  T  P   C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
              Prerequisite: Computer Network, Operating System 
Course Description 
This course covers a comprehensive range of topics related to intrusion detection, prevention, and 
analysis, with a specific focus on the practical application of the Snort tool. Students will gain 
knowledge about the historical context, various types of threats, response strategies, and hands-on 
experience with Snort for intrusion detection and prevention. 
          Course Objectives: 
1. Comprehend the historical evolution and key concepts of intrusion detection and audit 
techniques. 
2. Gain skills to effectively use various IDS and IPS technologies, including hybrid approaches. 
3. Develop the ability to independently install, configure, and use Snort in diverse scenarios. 
4. Foster analytical skills for intrusion detection, encompassing vulnerability analysis and 
response strategy formulation.  
5. Explore  advanced  techniques,  including  ACID  and  Snort  Snarf,  and  understand different 
IDS and IPS architecture models. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9  Hrs  
History of Intrusion detection, Audit, Concept and definition , Internal and external threats to data, 
attacks, Need and types of IDS, Information sources Host based information sources, Network 
based information sources. 
  UNIT-II                      9 Hrs  
  Intrusion  Prevention  Systems,  Network  IDs,  protocol  based  IDs  ,Hybrid  IDs,  Analysis 
schemes, thinking about intrusion. A model for intrusion analysis techniques, Responses 
requirement of responses, types of responses mapping, responses to policy Vulnerability analysis, 
credential analysis, non credential analysis. 
UNIT-III            9 Hrs 
Introduction to Snort, Snort Installation Scenarios, Installing Snort, Running Snort on Multiple 
Network Interfaces, Snort Command Line Options. Step-By-Step Procedure to Compile and Install 
Snort Location of Snort Files, Snort Modes Snort Alert Modes 
 UNIT-IV             9 Hrs 
Working with Snort Rules, Rule Headers, Rule Options, The Snort Configuration File etc. Plugins, 
Preprocessors and Output Modules, Using Snort with MySQL 
UNIT-V            9 Hrs 
Using  ACID  and  Snort  Snarf  with  Snort,  Agent  development  for  intrusion  detection, 
Architecture models of IDs and IPs. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.  Articulate the historical evolution of intrusion detection, define key concepts, and understand 
cybersecurity importance. 
 
2.   Demonstrate proficiency in deploying various IDS and IPS technologies, informed by threat 
assessments. 
 
3. Install, configure, and use Snort for intrusion detection across multiple network interfaces. 
 
4. Ability to analyze intrusions, conduct vulnerability assessments, and formulate responses 
aligned with security policies. 
 
5.  Apply advanced techniques, including ACID and Snort Snarf, and develop custom agents for 
tailored intrusion detection solutions. Understand different architecture models of IDS and 
IPS. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.   Rafeeq Rehman : “ Intrusion Detection with SNORT, Apache, MySQL, PHP and ACID,” 1st 
Edition, Prentice Hall , 2003. 
 
REFERENCES: 
1. Christopher Kruegel,Fredrik Valeur, Giovanni Vigna: “Intrusion Detection and Correlation 
Challenges and Solutions”, 1st Edition, Springer, 2005. 
2. Carl Endorf, Eugene Schultz and Jim Mellander “ Intrusion Detection & Prevention”, 1st 
Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
3. Stephen Northcutt, Judy Novak : “Network Intrusion Detection”, 3rd Edition, New Riders 
Publishing, 2002. 
4. T. Fahringer, R. Prodan, “A Text book on Grid Application Development and Computing 
Environment”. 6th Edition, KhannaPublihsers, 2012. 
 
BTST3602c : Internetworking with TCP/IP L  T  P   C 
 Program Elective -II 3   0   0   3 
                 Prerequisite: Computer Networks 
Course Description: The "Internetworking with TCP/IP" course is a comprehensive exploration of 
networking principles, focusing on the OSI Model and the TCP/IP Protocol Suite. Delve into 
underlying network technologies, protocol layers, and addressing schemes, both in wired Local Area 
Networks (LANs) and Wireless LANs. Subsequent units cover crucial topics such as network layer 
services, IPv4 addressing, delivery and forwarding of IP packets, and security measures in Internet 
Protocol Version 4 (IPv4). 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Grasp fundamental concepts of network technologies, OSI Model, TCP/IP Protocol 
Suite, and addressing in wired and wireless LANs. 
 
2.   Master switching,  packet  switching,  Network Layer services,  and  IPv4  addresses 
(classful and classless addressing). 
 
3.   Examine IP packet delivery, forwarding, router structure, and IPv4 details, including 
datagrams, fragmentation, options, checksum, and security. 
 
4.   Investigate ARP's role in address mapping, ICMPv4 messages and debugging tools, 
and understand Mobile IP principles and inefficiencies. 
 
5.   Analyse unicast routing  protocols (RIP, OSPF, BGP) for intra- and inter-domain 
routing, configure DHCP for host setup, and comprehend FTP/TFTP for file transfers. 
 
 
UNIT I 9 Hrs 
Introduction and Underlying Network Technologies, The OSI Model and the TCP/IP Protocol 
Suite : Protocol Layers , The OSI Model , TCP/IP Protocol Suite , Addressing, Wired Local 
Area Networks : Wireless LANS, Connecting Devices 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Introduction To Network Layer : Switching, Packet Switching At Network Layer, Network 
Layer Services, Other Network Layer Issues, Ipv4 Addresses: Classful Addressing, Classless 
Addressing, Special Addresses 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Delivery and Forwarding of IP Packets: Delivery, Forwarding, Structure of a Router Internet 
Protocol Version 4 (IPv4) : Datagrams, Fragmentation, Options, checksum, IP OVER ATM, 
Security, IP Package 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Address  Resolution  Protocol  (ARP):  ADDRESS  MAPPING,  THE  ARP  PROTOCOL, 
ATMARP,  ARP  PACKAGE  Internet  Control  Message  Protocol  Version  4(ICMPv4): 
MESSAGES, DEBUGGING TOOLS, ICMP PACKAGE Mobile IP : Address ,Agents , Three 
Phases, Inefficiency In Mobile IP. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Unicast Routing Protocols (RIP, OSPF, and BGP) : Introduction, Intra- And Inter-Domain 
Routing, Distance Vector Routing,RIP, Link State Routing, OSPF, Path Vector Routing, BGP 
Host Configuration: DHCP : Introduction, DHCP Operation, Configuration, File Transfer: FTP 
and TFTP 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand the functionality of each layer in the TCP/IP protocol with examples. 
2. Implement subnetting and supernetting for classful architecture and show how they were 
used to overcome the deficiency of classful addressing. 
3. Use various routing protocols in autonomous systems. 
4. Implement address resolution protocol (ARP), which can be used to dynamically map a 
logical address to a physical address 
5. Demonstrate dynamic host configuration protocol in the wired network. 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
 
Behrouz A Forouzan, “TCP/IP Protocol Suite”, TMH, 4 th Edition,2010 
 
References : 
 
1.Mahbub Hasan & Raj Jain, ” High performance TCP/IP Networking”, PHI -2005 
2. Douglas. E.Comer, “Internetworking with TCP/IP “, Volume I PHI 
3. Larry L. Perterson and Bruce S. Davie , “Computer Networks- A Systems Approach”, 2011, 
Morgan Kaufmann 
4. B.A. Forouzan, “Data communication & Networking”, TMH, 4th Edition 
BTST3602d IoT SECURITY L  T  P  C 
3   0   0   3 
 
Prerequisite: Basic Computer Programming Skills 
Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive exploration of security principles and strategies in the 
context of the Internet of Things (IoT). This course delves into securing the Internet of Things 
(IoT), covering architecture, applications, and security measures. Students gain hands-on 
experience designing secure systems, implementing Identity and Access Management (IAM), 
and addressing IoT threats. A practical capstone project enhances skills, preparing graduates 
to navigate challenges in securing IoT environments. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand and explain the architecture that supports security in IoT ecosystems. 
2. Formulate strategies for designing secure IoT systems, considering hardware, software, 
and network security. 
3. Apply various authentication mechanisms for secure IoT device interactions. 
4. Apply security controls to safeguard IoT data and operations in the cloud. 
5. Investigate and analyze specific attacks on IoT systems, such as guest hopping, VM 
attacks, and hyperjacking. 
 
 
UNIT I Securing of Internet Things 9 Hrs 
The IoT Paradigm - IoT Security Architecture - IoT Applications - Threats and Attacks - IoT 
Security Requirements - secure IoT system implementation lifecycle. 
 
 
UNIT II Fundamentals of IoT Ecosystem 9 Hrs 
IoT security issues - How to design an IoT system - Hardware, software and network security 
related to IoT systems - Basics of cryptographic solutions to IoT systems. 
 
 
UNIT III Identity and Access Management for IoT 9 Hrs 
Introduction  -  Identity  lifecycle  -  Authentication  credentials  -  IoT  IAM  infrastructure  - 
Authorization and access control - Privacy challenges introduced by the IoT. 
 
 
UNIT IV Cloud Security for the IoT 9 Hrs 
Cloud services and the IoT - Cloud IoT security controls - IoT cloud security architecture - 
Threats both to safety and security. 
 
 
UNIT V IoT Security Threats and Countermeasures 9 Hrs 
System-Specific Attacks: Guest hopping, attacks on the VM, VM migration attack, hyper 
jacking. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Demonstrate a thorough understanding of the foundational concepts, characteristics, 
and security architecture that define the Internet of Things (IoT). 
2. Design secure IoT systems, considering hardware, software, and network security issues. 
3. 8.   Implementing   IAM   strategies   for   IoT,   including   managing   identity   
lifecycles, authentication mechanisms, and access control. 
4. Implementing security controls, and designing secure cloud architectures for IoT systems. 
5. Develop the ability to analyze system-specific attacks on IoT 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. David Etter, IoT Security: Practical guide book, Create Space, 1st Edition, 2016 
2. Drew  Van  Duren, Brian  Russell,  Practical  Internet  of  Things  Security,  1st  edition, 
PACEKT, 2016 
3. Brian Russell, Drew Van Duren, Practical Internet of Things Security: Design a security 
framework for an Internet connected ecosystem, 2nd Edition, 2018. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Sean Smith, The Internet of Risky Things, O'Reilly Media, 1st Edition, 2017. 
2. Fei HU, “Security and Privacy in Internet of Things (IoTs): Models, Algorithms, and 
Implementations”, CRC Press,2016 
3. Ollie Whitehouse, “Security of Things: An Implementers’ Guide to Cyber-Security for 
Internet of Things Devices and Beyond”, NCC Group, 2014 
 
BTST3602e : DATABASE ADMINISTRATION L  T  P   C 
 Program Elective -II 3   0   0   3 
PRE-REQUISITES:  A course on Database Management Systems 
 
 
Course Description: 
This course familiarizes students with different concepts of database administration including 
DBA Roles and responsibilities, tablespace and storage management, DB backup, restoration 
and recovery, security, multitenant, and performance tuning. 
 
 
Course Objective: 
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts of database 
administration so that the students will be able handle 
1.   Install DBMS Software 
2.   Create and manage databases 
3.   Manage backup and recovery 
4.   Control user security 
5.   Managing database performance and multitenant architecture 
 
 
Unit I: 10 Hrs 
Introduction,  Tablespace  and  Storage  management:  DBA  Roles  and  Responsibilities; 
Database Architecture; ORACLE logical and physical database structure; Memory and Process 
Structure, SQLPLUS Overview, creating a database. 
Working  with  Tablespaces  and  Data Files,  Creating  and  adding  tablespace and  datafiles, 
Managing Control Files, Online Redo Logs and Archive logs; Multiplexing 
 
 
Unit II: 8 Hrs 
Managing Database Objects: Working with Tables and Constraints; Working with Indexes, 
Views,  Synonyms,  and  Sequences;  Partitioning  and  Materialized  Views,  Introduction  of 
PLSQL, Stored Procedure, Functions, Trigger, package 
 
 
Unit III: 10 Hrs 
Database  Backup,  Restore,  and  Recovery:  Backup  and  Recovery  Overview,  Database 
backup,  restoration  and  recovery,  defining  a  backup  and  recovery  strategy,  Backup  and 
Recovery options; Data Dump; User-Managed Backup and Recovery; Configuring RMAN; 
RMAN Backups,  Restore and  Recovery;  High  Availability  Features;  Oracle  Data  Guard; 
Flashback operations. 
 
 
Unit IV: 7 Hrs 
Database Security and Auditing: Database Security and Auditing; Database Authentication 
Methods;  Database  Authorization  Methods;  Data  Encryption  Techniques,  Virtual  Private 
Database;  Managing  Users  and  Security:  Profiles,  managing  users,  managing  privileges, 
managing roles. 
 
Unit V: 10 Hrs 
Multitenant Database Architecture and Database Tuning: Understanding the Multitenant 
Architecture, Pluggable Architecture; Creating CDB; Administrating Root Container; Creating 
Pluggable Databases (PDBs) within a CDB; Administrating Pluggable Databases; Backup and 
Recovery in multitenant Environment; Databases in the Cloud. 
Tuning Application Design; Tuning Memory Usage; Tuning Data Access; Tuning Data 
Manipulation; Reducing Network Traffic; Using Automatic Workload Repository (AWR); 
Automatic Database Diagnostic Monitor (ADDM), Tuning SQL; SQL Tuning Advisor, 
Performance Tuning in a Multitenant Environment; Distributed Databases and Networking Tool 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to 
1.   Understand the roles and responsibilities of DBA and Database architecture. 
2.   Create various database objects like Indexes, Sequences, Views and also know how to 
create triggers and stored procedures. 
3.   Know how to create database backup and recovering data in case of disasters. 
4.   Able to know how to provide security for the data stored in the database. 
5.   Understand the concept of database tuning. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Database Administration: The Complete Guide to DBA Practices and Procedures By 
Craig S. Mullins, Second Edition, Addison Wesley. 
2.   Oracle 19c Database Administration: Oracle Simplified, Tanveer A 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   SQL & PL / SQL for Oracle 11g Black Book, P.S. Deshpande, Dreamtech. 
2.   Oracle 11g Administration in Simple Steps, Kogent Solutions Inc. 
 
BTST3603a  SOFTWARE PROJECT MANAGEMENT L T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
 
 
Prerequisites:  A basic understanding of Software Engineering 
Course Description: This course is aimed at introducing the primary important concepts of 
project management related to managing software development projects. They will also get 
familiar with the different activities involved in Software Project Management. Further, they 
will also come to know how to successfully plan and implement a software project management 
activity, and to complete a specific project in time with the available budget. 
Course Objectives: 
The course should enable the students to: 
1. To understand the Software Project Planning and Evaluation techniques. 
2. To plan and manage projects at each stage of the software development life cycle (SDLC). 
3. To learn about activity planning and risk management principles. 
4. To manage software projects and control software deliverables. 
5. To develop skills to manage the various phases involved in project management and people 
management. 
6. To deliver successful software projects that support organization‘s strategic goals. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Project Evaluation and Project Planning: Importance of Software Project Management – 
Activities – Methodologies – Categorization of Software Projects – Setting objectives – 
Management Principles – Management Control – Project portfolio Management – Cost-benefit 
evaluation technology – Risk evaluation – Strategic program Management – Stepwise Project 
Planning. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Project Life Cycle and Effort Estimation: Software process and Process Models – Choice of 
Process  models  –  Rapid  Application  development  –  Agile  methods  –  Dynamic  System 
Development Method – Extreme Programming– Managing interactive processes – Basics of 
Software estimation – Effort and Cost estimation techniques – COSMIC Full function points – 
COCOMO II – a Parametric Productivity Model. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Activity Planning and Risk Management: Objectives of Activity planning – Project schedules – Activities – Sequencing and scheduling – Network Planning models – Formulating Network 
Model – Forward Pass & Backward Pass techniques – Critical path (CRM) method – Risk 
identification – Assessment – Risk Planning –Risk Management – – PERT technique – Monte 
Carlo simulation – Resource Allocation – Creation of critical paths – Cost schedules. 
 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Project Management and Control: Framework for Management and control – Collection of data – Visualizing progress – Cost monitoring – Earned Value Analysis – Prioritizing Monitoring – 
Project  tracking  –  Change  control  –  Software  Configuration  Management  –  Managing 
contracts – Contract Management. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Staffing in Software Projects: Managing people – Organizational behavior – Best methods of 
staff selection – Motivation – The Oldham – Hackman job characteristic model – Stress – 
Health and Safety – Ethical and Professional concerns – Working in teams – Decision making –  Organizational  structures  –  Dispersed  and  Virtual  teams  –  Communications  genres  – 
Communication plans – Leadership. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After completion of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand the basic concepts, terminologies and issues of software project 
management. 
2. Identify & analyze the different project contexts and suggest an appropriate management 
strategy. 
3. Practice the role of professional ethics in successful software development. 
4. Identify and describe the key phases of project management. 
5. Determine an appropriate project management approach through an evaluation of the 
business context and scope of the project. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Bob Hughes, Mike Cotterell and Rajib Mall: Software Project Management – Fifth Edition, 
Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2012. 
2. Software Project Management, by Walker Royce, Pearson Education 
 
 
References: 
1. Effective project management: Traditional, Agile, Extreme, Robert Wysocki, Sixth Edition, 
Wiley India, 2011. 
2.  Software Project Management, Bob Hughes & Mike Cotterell, fourth edition, Tata Mc- 
Graw Hill,2006 
3. Applied Software Project Management, Andrew Stellman & Jennifer Greene, O’Reilly, 
2006. 
 
BTST3603b HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTING L   T  P  C 
                Prerequisites: Computer Organization and Architecture  3   0   0   3 
Course Description: 
High Performance Computing most generally refers to the practice of aggregating computing 
power in a way that delivers much higher performance than one could get out of a typical 
desktop computer or workstation to solve large problems in science, engineering, or business. 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To introduce the concepts of Modern Processors. 
2.   To introduce Optimization techniques for serial code. 
3.   To introduce Parallel Computing Paradigms. 
4.   To introduce Parallel Programming using OpenMP and MPI. 
5.   To understand efficient communication method 
 
 
Unit I 9 Hrs 
Modern Processors: Stored Program Computer Architecture- General purpose cache- based 
microprocessor-  Memory  Hierarchies  -  Multicore  processors-  Muti-threaded  processors- 
Vector Processors. 
Basic optimization techniques for serial code: scalar profiling- common sense optimizations- 
simple measures, large impact- The role of compilers - c++ optimizations - Data access 
optimization: Balance analysis and light speed estimates- storage order. 
case study: The Jacobi algorithm, Dense matrix transpose, Sparse matrix- vector 
 
 
Unit II 10 Hrs 
Parallel   Computers:   Taxonomy   of   parallel   computing   paradigms-   Shared   memory 
computers- Cache coherence- UMA - ccNUMA- Distributed-memory computers- Hierarchical 
systems- Networks- Basic performance characteristics Buses- Switched and fat- tree networks- 
Mesh networks- Hybrids - Basics of parallelization - Why parallelize - Data Parallelism - 
Function Parallelism Parallel Scalability- Factors that limit parallel execution- Scalability 
metrics Simple scalability laws- parallel efficiency - serial performance Vs Strong scalability- 
Refined performance models- Choosing the right scaling base line 
Case Study: Can slow processors compute faster- Load balance. 
 
 
Unit III 8 Hrs 
Distributed memory parallel programming with MPI: message passing - introduction to 
MPI – example - messages and point-to-point communication - collective communication – 
nonblocking point-to-point communication- virtual topologies - MPI parallelization of Jacobi 
solver- MPI implementation - performance properties 
 
 
Unit IV          9 Hrs 
Shared memory parallel programming with OpenMP: introduction to Open Mp - parallel 
execution - data scoping- OpenMP work sharing for loopssynchronization - reductions - loop 
scheduling - tasking - case study: Open Mpparallel jacobi algorithm-  advanced 
OpenMpwavefront  parallelization-  Efficient  OpenMP  programming:  Profiling  OpenMP 
programs - Performance pitfalls Case study: Parallel Sparse matrix-vector multiply. 
 
Unit V            9 Hrs 
Efficient   MPI   programming:   MPI   performance   tools-   communication   parameters- 
Synchronization,  serialization,  contention-  Reducing  communication  overhead-  optimal 
domain decomposition- Aggregating messages – Nonblocking Vs Asynchronous 
communication- Collective communication- Understanding intra-node  point-to-point 
communication. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
On completion of the course, student will be able to: 
1.   Understand the advantages, issues and challenges of the current processors 
2.   Apply how to optimize a parallel code. 
3.   Understand the various parallel programming paradigms and learn how to choose the right 
one based on the application domain. 
4.   Analyze parallel codes that are optimized for performance. 
5.   Implement MPI programming for developing efficient programs 
 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Georg Hager, Gerhard Wellein, Introduction to High Performance Computing for 
Scientists and Engineers, Chapman & Hall / CRC Computational Science series, 2011. 
2.   Introduction to Parallel Computing, Ananth Grama, Anshul Gupta, George Karypis, 
and Vipin Kumar, 2nd edition, Addison-Welsey, 2003. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Grama, A. Gupta, G. Karypis, V. Kumar, An Introduction to Parallel Computing, 
Design and Analysis of Algorithms: 2/e, Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
2.   G.E. Karniadakis, R.M. Kirby II, Parallel Scientific Computing in C++ and MPI: A 
Seamless Approach to Parallel Algorithms and their Implementation, Cambridge 
University Press,2003. 
3.   Charles Severance, Kevin Dowd, High Performance Computing, O'Reilly Media, 2nd 
Edition, 1998. 
4.   Kai  Hwang,  Faye  Alaye  Briggs,  Computer  Architecture  and  Parallel  Processing, 
McGraw Hill, 1984. 
 
BTST3603c MERN TECHNOLOGIES L  T  P C 
                Prerequisites: None                  3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The MERN React Full Stack Web Developer certification validates proficiency in full stack 
frameworks. MERN stands for MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, and Node.js - a set of 
JavaScript technologies enabling developers to build complex, robust web applications. 
MongoDB is a database system, Express.js manages the backend, React.js handles the frontend 
and Node.js enables server-side scripting. Industries primarily use this certification to 
authenticate a developer's competence in using these technologies for designing, developing, 
testing, deploying and maintaining web applications. It is extremely popular due to the rising 
demand for professionals proficient in full stack development, especially those adept at using 
these specific technologies. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The primary Course Objectives of the MERN React Full Stack Web Developer course is to 
Equip learners  with  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  MERN  Stack  that  includes 
MongoDB, Express.js, React.js and Node.js, which are essential for full stack development. 
1. Get understand about MERN and its components. 
2. Analyze the react components and react state. 
3. Learn to integrate the technologies to Express and Graph to build applications. 
4. Expertise and understand the various concepts of Mongo DB. 
5.Get   depth   understanding   of   node   environment   and   Asynchronous   Event   Driven 
Programming, file accessing. 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Introduction: MERN Introduction, MERN Components, Why MERN. Hello World. Hello 
World: Server-Less Hello World, JSX, Project Setup, Express, Separate Script file, JSX 
Transform, Older Browsers Support, Automate. 
 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
React Components: Issue Tracker, React Classes, Composing Components, Passing Data 
Using Properties, Passing Data Using Children, Dynamic Composition. 
React State: Initial State, Async State Initialization, Updating State, Lifting State Up, Event 
Handling, Stateless Components, Designing Components. 
 
 
UNIT III 9 Hrs 
Express and GraphQL: Express, REST API, Graph QL, About API, GraphQL Schema File, 
List API, List API Integration, Custom Scalar Types, The Create API, Create API Integration, 
Query Variables, Input Validations, Displaying Errors. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Mongo DB: Mango DB basics, MongoDB CRUD Operations, MongoDB Node.js Driver, 
Schema Initialization, Reading from Mongo DB, Writing to Mongo DB. 
 
UNIT  V       9 Hrs 
Understanding Node environment: Extending JavaScript, V8, The Process Object. 
Understanding Asynchronous Event Driven Programming: Broadcasting Events, 
Listening for Events, Timers, Understanding the Event Loop, Callbacks and errors. 
Streaming Data Across Node And clients: Exporting Steams, Creating and HTTP Server, 
The Request objects, Working with Headers, Handling Post Data. 
Access the File System: Directories & iterating overs files and folders, Reading from File, 
Writing to a File. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon the completion of this course the student will be able to, 
1.   Understand the MERN and its components. 
2.   Examine and can use the react components and react state. 
3.   Integrate the technologies to build Application Programming Interface using Express and 
GraphQL. 
4.   Analyze and understand the various concepts of Mongo DB. 
5.   Gain in depth understanding about node environment and Asynchronous Event Driven 
Programming, file accessing. 
 
 
Text Book: 
1.   Vasan Subramanian, Pro MERN Stack, Apress, 2019. 
2.   Eddy Wilson Iriarte Koroliova, MERN Quick Start Guide, Packt, 2018. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1.   Shama Hoque, Full Stack React Projects, Packt, Second Edition, 2020. 
2.   Vishal Kamal, Beginner’s Guide to MERN Technology: Building Modern Web 
Applications, 
3.   Daniel Watrous, Learning Path: Mastering MERN, Packt Publishing, 2016. 
 
BTST3603d                    Applications of AI and ML in Cyber Security        L  T  P  C 
Prerequisite: Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning                               3  0  0  3 
Course Description: In this course you will gain a solid foundation of the strengths and 
weaknesses of ML in cyber security applications, how ML can be used for malware 
detection, anomaly detection and much more. You will gain an understanding of how 
attackers can defeat ML systems, adversarial ML and techniques to make robust ML 
models. 
Course Objectives: 
1. An overview of different AI and Machine Learning models in Cyber Security  
2. Using Machine Learning for effective security  
3. Various attack on ML models  
4. Machine Learning and Privacy  
 
UNIT I                   9 Hrs 
Cybersecurity Foundations: Confidentiality/Integrity/Availability; Cyber Kill Chain; 
Threat Actors & Threat Modelling; Cybersecurity Frameworks  
ML Fundamentals: Supervised, semi-supervised, Unsupervised and Reinforcement 
Learning; Neural Networks & Deep Learning; Regression, Classification, Clustering, 
and Anomaly Detection 
 
UNIT II                 9 Hrs 
Introduction: Role of AI in Cyber Security and Security Framework: Artificial 
Intelligence in Cyber Security, Challenges and Promises, Security Threats of Artificial 
Intelligence, Use-Cases: Artificial Intelligence Email Observing, Programming in 
Python and Basics of manipulation of Data.  
 
UNIT III                 9 Hrs 
Machine Learning in Security: Introduction to Machine Learning, Applications of 
Machine Learning in Cyber Security Domain, Machine Learning: tasks and Approaches, 
Anomaly Detection, Privacy Preserving Nearest Neighbour Search, Machine Learning 
Applied to Intrusion Detection, Online Learning Methods for Detecting Malicious 
Executables  
 
UNIT IV               9 Hrs 
Deep Learning in Security: Introduction to deep learning, Cyber Security Mechanisms 
Using Deep Learning Algorithms, Applying deep learning in various use cases, Network 
Cyber threat Detection  
 
UNIT V             9 Hrs 
Artificial Intelligence in Cyber Security: Model Stealing & Watermarking, Network 
Traffic Analysis, Malware Analysis 
 
Course Outcomes:  
1. Understand the concepts in Machine Learning  
2. Learn various AI and Machine learning models for cyber security 
3. Ability to apply AI and machine learning models in cyber security issues 
4. Understand the concepts of deep learning in security 
5. Apply various AI techniques in cyber security  
 
 
Text Books  
1. Tom Mitchell. Machine Learning. McGraw Hill, 1997.  
2. Gupta, Brij B., and Quan Z. Sheng, eds. Machine learning for computer and 
cyber security: principle, algorithms, and practices. CRC Press, 2019.  
Reference Books  
1. Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining Approaches in Security Frameworks 
Editor(s):Neeraj Bhargava, Ritu Bhargava, Pramod Singh Rathore, Rashmi 
Agrawal, 2021. 
2. Tsai, Jeffrey JP, and S. Yu Philip, eds. Machine learning in cyber trust: security, 
privacy, and reliability. Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.  
3. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective, Kevin P Murphy, MIT Press. 
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer 
2006.
 BTST3603e                                       Mobile Security                                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                               3  0  0 3 
Prerequisite: Computer Networks 
Course Description: 
This course provides a thorough understanding of mobile platforms, including attack 
surfaces, risk landscape & more. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand common mobile application security vulnerabilities 
2. Articulate real-world threats to mobile applications 
3. Identify potential threats and motives for mobile device attacks through bluetooth 
4. To understand the working principle of Bluetooth 
5. Create an effective mobile device security strategy and policy with compliance  
 UNIT I          9 Hrs 
Top Mobile Issues and Development Strategies: Top Issues Facing Mobile Devices, 
Physical Security , Secure Data Storage (on Disk), Strong Authentication with Poor 
Keyboards , Multiple-User Support with Security, Safe Browsing Environment , Secure 
Operating Systems, Application Isolation, Information Disclosure, Virus, Worms, 
Trojans, Spyware, and Malware , Difficult Patching/Update Process, Strict Use and 
Enforcement of SSL, Phishing , Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF), Location 
Privacy/Security, Insecure Device Drivers, Multi Factor Authentication, Tips for Secure 
Mobile Application Development.  
UNIT II                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
WAP and Mobile HTML Security WAP and Mobile HTML Basics, Authentication on 
WAP/Mobile HTML Sites, Encryption, Application Attacks on Mobile HTML Sites, 
Cross-Site Scripting, SQL Injection, Cross-Site Request Forgery, HTTP Redirects, 
Phishing, Session Fixation, Non-SSL Login, WAP and Mobile Browser Weaknesses, 
Lack of HTTP Only Flag Support, Lack of SECURE Flag Support, Handling Browser 
Cache, WAP Limitations.  
UNIT  III                                                                                                       9 Hrs 
Bluetooth Security Overview of the Technology , History and Standards , Common Uses 
, Alternatives, Future, Bluetooth Technical Architecture , Radio Operation and 
Frequency, Bluetooth Network Topology , Device Identification , Modes of Operation , 
Bluetooth Stack ,Bluetooth Profiles, Bluetooth Security Features , Pairing , Traditional 
Security Services in Bluetooth, Security “Non-Features” , Threats to Bluetooth Devices 
and Networks, Bluetooth Vulnerabilities, Bluetooth Versions Prior to v1.2, Bluetooth 
Versions Prior to v2.1. 
  
  
UNIT  IV                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
SMS Security Overview of Short Message Service, Overview of Multimedia Messaging 
Service, Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), Protocol Attacks, Abusing Legitimate 
Functionality, Attacking Protocol Implementations, Application Attacks, iPhone Safari, 
Windows Mobile MMS, Motorola RAZR JPG Overflow, Walkthroughs, Sending PDUs, 
Converting XML to WBXML.  
UNIT  V                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Enterprise Security on the Mobile OS Device Security Options, PIN, Remote, 346 
Secure Local Storage, Apple iPhone and Keychain, Security Policy Enforcement, 
Encryption, Full Disk Encryption, E-mail Encryption, File Encryption, Application 
Sandboxing, Signing, and Permissions, Application Sandboxing, Application Signing, 
Permissions, Buffer Overflow Protection, Windows Mobile, iPhone, Android, 
BlackBerry, Security Feature Summary.  
Course Outcomes:  
1. Understand common mobile application security vulnerabilities. 
2. Define the security controls of multiple mobile operating systems.  
3. Understand and analyse Bluetooth technology. 
4. Understand and analyse overview of SMS security. 
5. Understand the concept of encryption with real time application . 
 
TEXT BOOK:  
1. Mobile Application Security, Himanshu Dwivedi, Chris Clark, David Thiel, 
TATA McGraw Hill.  
 
REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1. Mobile and Wireless Network Security and Privacy, Kami S. Makki, et al,  
    Springer. 
2. Android Security Attacks Defences, Abhishek Dubey, CRC Press
BTSL3503            FULL STACK WEB DEVELOPMENT LAB L  T  P  C 
      
  0  0   2  1 
Prerequisite: None 
Course Description: 
• This course is designed for individuals with a passion for technology and a desire to 
build robust, end-to-end web solutions. This course focuses on developing full-stack 
applications, emphasizing the integration of user interface, business logic, and data 
storage. Throughout this course, you will explore into both front-end and back-end 
technologies, gaining hands-on experience in creating dynamic and responsive web 
applications.  
Course Objectives:  
1. To develop full stack applications with clear understanding of user interface, business 
logic and data storage.  
2. To design and develop user interface screens for a given scenario.  
3. To develop the functionalities as web components as per the requirements  
4. To implement the database according to the functional requirements  
5. To integrate the user interface with the functionalities and data storage.  
 
Lab Experiments 
 
1 a. Write a program to create a simple webpage using HTML. 
   b. Write a program to create a simple webpage with registration form using       
      HTML and CSS. 
  
 2 a. Write a program to validate a registration form using JavaScript.  
    b. Write a JavaScript to design a simple calculator to perform the following     
        operations: Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division.  
 
 3 a. Write a program to create and Build a Password Strength Check using       
        JQuery.  
    b. Write a program to create and build a star rating system using JQuery.  
 
 4. Write a program to create a simple calculator Application using React JS 
 
 5 a. Write a program to create a voting application using React JS  
    b. Create a Simple Login form using React JS 
 
 6 a. Using Angular JS Implement an Input Validation     
    b. Implement AngularJs to display the 10 students details in Table format 
 
 7 a. Implement NodeJS Modules 
    b. Develop CRUP Application using NoSQL(MongoDB) database   
 
 
 
 
 
Case Study 1: Develop a Tutorial Website 
Case Study 2: Develop an online survey application  
 
      Course Outcomes:  
1. Design and implement responsive and user-friendly front-end interfaces using HTML5, 
CSS3, and JavaScript.  
2. Apply front-end frameworks (e.g., React, Angular) to create dynamic and interactive 
web applications  
3. Develop server-side logic using languages like Node.js 
4. Perform CRUD operations, transactions, and ensure data integrity in both SQL and 
NoSQL databases  
5. Integrate all the necessary components of the application  
 
BTSL3504                                  CYBER SECURITY LAB        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                0  0  2 1 
Prerequisites: A course on “Network Security and Cryptography”.  
Course Description: This lab will help you learn the cybersecurity basics and teach you 
how to work with infrastructure security, network security, security devices, local 
network security, and access control monitoring systems. 
Course Objectives:  
1. To get practical exposure of Cyber security threats and Forensics tools.  
2. To provide workshops for the students with technical knowledge of security 
threats and methodologies. 
3. To educate the students that they can plan, execute, and observes network safety 
components to assist with guaranteeing the protection of data novelty resources. 
4. To train the students that they can identify, analyse, and provide corrective 
measures for computer security breaches. 
5. To Apply security concepts in real time applications 
List of Experiments 
1. Perform an Experiment for port scanning with nmap 
2. Set Up a honeypot and monitor the honeypot on the network  
3. Install Jscript/Cryptool tool (or any other equivalent) and demonstrate 
Asymmetric, Symmetric crypto algorithm, Hash and Digital/PKI signatures. 
4. Generate minimum 10 passwords of length 12 characters using open SSL 
command 
5. Perform practical approach to implement Footprinting-Gathering target 
information using Dmitry-Dmagic, UAtester  
6. Working with sniffers for monitoring network communication (Wireshark).  
7. Using Snort, perform real time traffic analysis and packet logging.  
8. Perform email analysis using the Autopsy tool. 
9. Perform Registry analysis and get boot time logging using process monitor tool  
10. Perform File type detection using Autopsy tool  
11. Perform Memory capture and analysis using FTK imager tool  
12. Perform Network analysis using the Network Miner tool  
Course Outcomes:  
1. Get the skill to identify cyber threats/attacks.  
2. Get the knowledge to solve security issues in day-to-day life.  
3. Able to use Autopsy tools  
4. Perform Memory capture and analysis 
5. Demonstrate Network analysis using Network miner tools 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. Real Digital Forensics for Handheld Devices, E. P. Dorothy, Auerback 
Publications, 2013. 
2. The Basics of Digital Forensics: The Primer for Getting Started in Digital 
Forensics, J. Sammons, Syngress Publishing, 2012. 
 REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1. Handbook of Digital Forensics and Investigation, E. Casey, Academic Press, 
2010.  
2. Malware Forensics Field Guide for Windows Systems: Digital Forensics Field 
Guides, C. H. Malin, E. Casey and J. M. Aquilina, Syngress, 2012. 
3. The Best Damn Cybercrime and Digital Forensics Book 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VII SEMESTER 
BTST4501 CYBER CRIME INVESTIGATIONS AND DIGITAL FORENSICS 
L  T P  C 
Prerequisite: None 3   0   0  3 
 
Course Description: The Cybercrime Investigation & Digital Forensics course provides an in- 
depth understanding of the principles and practices of cybercrime investigation and digital 
forensics. The course covers the essential concepts, methodologies, and tools used in 
cybercrime investigation and digital forensics, and prepares professionals and participants for 
a career in these fields. The course will additionally cover the specifics of digital forensics, 
including the forensic process, evidence collection and analysis, and forensic tools and 
techniques. 
 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To analyze how to conduct a digital forensics investigation and validate forensics data. 
2.   Understand the impact of cyber crime in real time applications 
3.   Discover the various methods to find the cyber crime 
4.   Apply the forensics technology 
5.   Develop the laws to control cyber crime 
 
 
UNIT  I:  Introduction        9 Hrs 
Introduction and Overview of Cyber Crime, Nature and Scope of Cyber Crime, Types of Cyber 
Crime: Social Engineering, Categories of Cyber Crime, Property Cyber Crime. 
 
 
UNIT  II: Cyber Crime Issues                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Unauthorized Access to Computers, Computer Intrusions, White collar Crimes, Viruses and 
Malicious Code, Internet Hacking and Cracking, Virus Attacks, Pornography, Software Piracy, 
Intellectual Property, Mail Bombs, Exploitation, Stalking and Obscenity in Internet, Digital 
laws and legislation, Law Enforcement Roles and Responses. 
 
 
UNIT III: Investigation        9 Hrs 
Introduction to Cyber Crime Investigation, Investigation Tools, eDiscovery, Digital Evidence 
Collection, Evidence Preservation, E-Mail Investigation, E-Mail Tracking, IP Tracking, E- 
Mail Recovery, Hands on Case Studies. Encryption and Decryption Methods, Search and 
Seizure of Computers, Recovering Deleted Evidences, Password Cracking. 
 
 
UNIT IV: Digital Forensics       9 Hrs 
Introduction to Digital Forensics, Forensic Software and Hardware, Analysis and Advanced 
Tools, Forensic Technology and Practices, Forensic Ballistics and Photography, Face, Iris and 
Fingerprint Recognition, Audio Video Analysis, Windows System Forensics, Linux System 
Forensics, Network Forensics. 
 
 
UNIT V: Laws and Acts        9 Hrs 
Laws and Ethics, Digital Evidence Controls, Evidence Handling Procedures, Basics of Indian 
Evidence ACT IPC and CrPC, Electronic Communication Privacy ACT, Legal Policies. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Understand the fundamentals of cybercrime. 
2.   Understand the various cybercrime issues. 
3.   Understand different investigation tools for cybercrime. 
4.   Understand basics of Forensic Technology and Practices. 
5.   Analyze different laws, ethics and evidence handling procedures. 
 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.   Nelson  Phillips  and  Enfinger  Steuart,  “Computer  Forensics  and  Investigations”, 
Cengage Learning, New Delhi, 2009. 
2.   Kevin Mandia, Chris Prosise, Matt Pepe, “Incident Response and Computer 
Forensics “, Tata McGraw -Hill, New Delhi, 2006. 
 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Robert M Slade,” Software Forensics”, Tata McGraw - Hill, New Delhi, 2005. 
2. Bernadette H Schell, Clemens Martin, “Cybercrime”, ABC – CLIO Inc, California, 
2004. 3. “Understanding Forensics in IT “, NIIT Ltd, 2005. 
BTST4502 
BIG DATA ANALYTICS 
L  T  P  C 
3   0   0   3 
Prerequisite: Data Warehousing and Data Mining 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to provide the complete insights about Big Data Analytics. The Course 
mainly focus on various Big Data Eco systems like Hadoop, Spark, PIC, HIVE, HBASE, 
Kafka, etc. This course also discusses about different algorithm in focus with Big Data 
Applications.     
Course Objectives 
The following are the course objectives: 
1. To understand the fundamental characteristics and best practices of Big Data Analytics. 
2. To understand the concept of Hadoop Ecosystem and its associated components in the 
Hadoop Framework. 
3. To Analyze the essential characteristics of HBASE and Kafka. 
4. To Apply the key features of Apache Spark in developing and executing Big Data 
Applications. 
5. Examine the algorithms for Big Data Applications. 
UNIT I                                                                                       
Introduction – Data Types and File Formats – Databases in Hive – HiveQL: Data Definition – 
Data Manipulation – Queries – Views – Indexes – Schema Design. 
9 Hrs 
Introduction to Big Data: Introduction to Big Data: Big Data and Business case – Building the 
Big Data Team - Big Data Big Data Enabling Technologies: Sources-Nuts and Bolts of Big 
Data- Big Data Security - Compliance - auditing and protection-Evolution of Big Data-Best 
practices for Big Data Analytics-Big Data characteristics- Volume - Veracity - Velocity - 
Variety- Structure of Big Data. 
UNIT II                                                                                                                      
9  Hrs 
Hadoop Distributed File System And Map Reduce Programming: Introduction to Hadoop - 
Hadoop Stack for Big Data - Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) - Hadoop MapReduce 
1.0 - Hadoop MapReduce 2.0 -Advanced Features of Hadoop MapReduce 2.0 - MapReduce 
Examples. 
Case study: Word Count Example, Healthcare Data Analysis using Map Reduce Programming. 
UNIT III                                                               
9 Hrs 
Working With Pig and Hive : Introduction – installation and execution – PIG Data Model – 
PIG Latin – Input, Output- Relational Operators – User Defined Functions – Join 
Implementations – Integrating Pig with Legacy Code and Map Reduce –Developing and 
Testing Pig Latin Scripts.  
UNIT IV                                                            8 Hrs 
Hbase and Kafka :  Design of HBase-Spark Streaming and Sliding Window Analytics - 
Sliding Window Analytics-Introduction to Kafka 
UNIT V                                                                                     10 Hrs 
Big Data Analytics Using Spark: Introduction to Spark - Parallel Programming with Spark - 
Spark Built-in Libraries  Design of Key-Value Stores - Data Placement Strategies - CAP 
Theorem- Consistency Solutions - Design of Zookeeper - CQL (Cassandra Query Language) - 
Big Data Predictive Analytics - PageRank Algorithm in Big Data - Spark GraphX & Graph 
Analytics.  Case Study: Flight Data Analysis using Spark GraphX. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
On completion of the course, student will be able to: 
1. Explain fundamental characteristics and best practices of Big Data Analytics. 
2. Define concept of Hadoop Ecosystem and its associated components in the Hadoop 
Framework. 
3. Analyze the key features of Apache Spark in developing and executing Big Data 
Applications. 
4. Analyze the essential characteristics of HBASE and Kafka. 
5. Examine the algorithms for Big Data Applications. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Ohlhorst, Frank J. Big data analytics: turning big data into big money. Vol. 65. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2012. 
2. Tom White, “HADOOP: The definitive Guide”, O Reilly 2012. 
3. Guller, Mohammed. Big data analytics with Spark: A practitioner's guide to using Spark 
for large scale data analysis. Apress, 2015. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Boris lublinsky, Kevin t. Smith, Alexey Yakubovich, “Professional Hadoop Solutions”, 
Wiley, ISBN: 9788126551071, 2015. 
2. Tom Plunkett, Brian Macdonald et al, “Oracle Big Data Handbook”, Oracle Press, 2014. 
3. Taming the Big Data Tidal Wave: Finding Opportunities in Huge Data Streams with 
Advanced Analytics, Bill Franks, John Wiley &Sons, 2012.  
BTST4601a Digital Twin L T P  C 
3  0  0  3 
 
Prerequisite: Python Programming and C++ 
 
Course Description: This course will give a comprehensive introduction to digital twins and 
the technologies to make them possible. Specifically, the course will briefly introduce the tools 
and techniques for creating representation models and user interfaces for digital twins. It will 
also cover the basics of the Internet of Things, data science, and theory/data-driven modeling 
methods that make digital twins useful in practice. The project-based learning method will be 
adopted throughout this course. 
 
Course Objectives 
1.   To understand the fundamentals of digital twin and enabling technologies for digital 
twin 
2.   To understand how to build a digital twin 
3.   To study application areas of digital twin 
4.   To understand digital twin as an interdisciplinary technology along with its integration 
5.   To understand new business and Revenue models of digital twin 
 
Unit I: Evolution of Digital Twins      9 Hrs 
Introduction to Digital twin, Basic concepts of Digital twins, Growth drivers for digital twin, 
Product & Process digital twins, Digital Model, Digital Shadow, Digital twin Prototype (DTP), 
Digital Twin Instance (DTI), Digital Twin Aggregate (DTA), Partial digital twin, Clone digital 
twin, augmented digital twin, Smart & Connected design, accelerating industry 4.0 using 
Digital Twin 
 
Unit  II: Enabling technologies      9 Hrs 
Digital Twin like Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), Deep Learning (DL), 
Big Data Analytics, Internet of Things (IOT), Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR), 
Mixed Reality (MR), Cloud Computing Services (CCS) etc. 
 
Unit  III: Build a Digital Twin        9 Hrs 
How to build a digital Twin, Steps in building digital twin, integration of IOT & CAD, 
integration of IOT, BIM data & machine Learning, Hardware & Software related to digital 
twin, working of a digital twin, Digital Twin Platforms Concurrent engineering & digital twin, 
digital twin as a smart service to industries. 
 
Unit  IV: Use Cases       9 Hrs  
Use cases of Digital Twin in Product development, Logistics Manufacturing, Simulation, 
Predictive Maintenance,  Asset  Maintenance,  Construction  industry,  Facility  Management 
Architecture, Electrical engineering, digital twin driven power transformer service, Health 
Care & etc. 
 
Unit V: Application        9 Hrs 
Integration of Digital Twin with Product Life Cycle Management (PLM), Big Data Analytics, 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Customer Relationship Management (CRM), Supplier 
Relationship Management (SRM), Manufacturing Execution Systems (MES) etc. 
Building New business/Revenue models, developing maturity model of digital twin, Benefits 
of Digital Twins, Challenges in applying & implementing digital twins Future research areas 
of digital twin, Careers in Digital twin, Digital Twin Engineer 
 
 
Course Outcomes 
Upon successful completion of the course, students should be able 
1.   Explain & write basic concepts of digital twin 
2.   Identify various enabling technologies of digital twin. 
3.   Apply theoretical knowledge in practice 
4.   Design the model for various real time applications 
5.   Develop small application using digital twin related software 
 
 
 
Text Books 
1.   Digital Twin: Possibilities of the new Digital twin technology, Anand Iyer, 2017, 35 
Pages 
2.   Digital Twin Development & Deployment on the Cloud, Ist edition, Nassim Khaled 
Bibin Pattel Affan Siddiqu, ISBN: 9780128216316, ELSEVIER, pages 592 
3.   Digital Twin Technologies & Smart Cities, Maryam Farsi, Alireza Daneshkhah, Amin 
Hosseinian-Far, Hamid Jahankahani, Springer, ISBN 978-3-030-18731-6 
4.   Digital Twin Driven Smart Manufacturing, By Fei Tao, Meng Zhang, A.Y.C. Nee, 
ISBN 
978-0-12 817630-6, ELSEVIER, pages 257 
5.   Advances in Computers, The Digital Twin Paradigm for Smarter Systems and 
Environments: The Industry, Pethuraj & Preetha Evanjaline, ELSEVIER, pages 257, 
ISBN 978-0-12-818756-2, ISSN 0065 2458 
 
 
 
Reference Books 
1.   Digital Twin Driven Smart Design by Fei Tao, Ang Liu, Tianliang Hu, A.Y.C. Nee, 
ELSEVIER, ISBN 978-0-12-818918-4, Pages 333 
2.   Handbook Of Digital Enterprise Systems: Digital Twins, Simulation and Ai, by 
Wolfgang Kühn, world scientific publishing co., ISBN 978-981-120-073-1, Pages 
229. 
3.   Digital Twin Complete Self-Assesment Guide, 1976302927, 9781976302923sment 
Guide,  Geradus  Blokdyk,  CreateSpace  Independent  Publishing  Platform,  2017, 
Pages 120. 
 
BTST4601b INFORMATION SECURITY L   T   P  C 
  3   0   0   3 
                   Prerequisite: Computer Networks, Operating Systems, Database Management System 
Course Description: 
This course offers complete coverage of all aspects of computer security, including users, 
software, devices, operating systems, database, networks and privacy issues. Reflecting rapidly 
evolving attacks and countermeasures, it introduces up-to-the-minute best practices for 
authenticating users, preventing malicious code execution, using encryption, protecting 
privacy, implementing firewalls, detecting intrusions and more. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To learn various threats and attacks in a network. 
2. To understand and explore fundamental techniques in developing secure applications. 
3. To analyze various authentication and access control mechanisms. 
4. To learn various methodologies for securing information systems ranging from operating  
      systems to database management systems and to applications. 
5. To understand various privacy issues and policies 
 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Information Security Concepts: Information Security - Computer Security - Threats - Harm - Vulnerabilities - Program Security - Malicious code - Malwares: Viruses, Trojan Horses and 
Worms - Counter measures. Authentication and Access Control: Authentication - Key 
management schemes - Hierarchical Key Management Techniques -Security Standards - User 
Authentication Protocols - Implementing Access Controls - Access Control Models - Role 
Based Access Control - Attribute Based Access Control - Attribute based Encryption in 
Information Storage - Physical Access Controls. 
 
 
UNIT II 9 Hrs 
Operating Systems Security: Security in Operating System - Security in the design of OS: 
Simplified Design, Layered Design, Kernelized design, Reference Monitor, Trusted Systems, 
Trusted Systems Functions - Trusted Operating System Design - Rootkit. 
 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Security Countermeasures: Design of Firewalls - Types - Personal Firewalls - Configurations - Network Address Translation - Data Loss Prevention - Intrusion Detection and Prevention 
Systems: Types of IDSs, Intrusion Prevention system, Intrusion Response, Goals of IDSs, 
Strength and Limitations. 
 
 
UNIT IV 9 Hrs 
Database Security: Database Security - Database Security Requirements - Reliability and 
Integrity - Sensitive Data - Types of Disclosures - Preventing Disclosures - Inference - 
Multilevel Databases - Multilevel Security - Database Attacks - SQL Injection Attacks. 
Web Security: Browser Attacks: Types, Failed Identification and Authentication - Misleading 
and Malicious Web Contents - Protection against Malicious Web Pages - Website Data: Code 
within Data, Cross Site Scripting Attacks - Prevention of Data Attacks - Fake e-mails - Spam 
Detection - Phishing Attacks - Phishing URL Detection and Prevention. 
UNIT V 9 Hrs 
Privacy Issues: Privacy Concepts: Aspects of Information Privacy, Computer-Related Privacy 
Problems -Threats to Personal Data Privacy -  People-Based Privacy Concerns - Privacy 
Principles and Policies - Individual Actions to Protect Privacy - Governments and Privacy - 
Identify Theft - Privacy issues on the Web Data - Application of Cryptographic Techniques for 
Privacy Preservation. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Apply fundamental knowledge on key security concepts, access control and 
authentication. 
2. Comprehend the use of security techniques for securing the information. 
3. Differentiate the needs and application of security in Operating System and Firewalls. 
4. Apply various data privacy policies in different areas of web-based security systems. 
5. Analyze various privacy principles and policies. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Charles P. Pfleeger, Shari Lawrence Pfleeger, Jonathan Margulies, Security in 
Computing, 2018, Fifth Edition, Pearson, New York. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Mark Stamp, Information Security: Principles and Practice, 2021, 3rd Edition, Wiley. 
2. Joanna Lyn Grama, Legal and Privacy Issues in Information Security, 2020, 3rd 
Edition, Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Inc. 
BTST4601c                     MOBILE APPLICATION SECURITY                        L  T  P  
C Prerequisite: Object Oriented programming through JAVA                                3   0  
0  3 
Course 
Description: 
This course provides a thorough understanding of mobile platforms, including 
attack surfaces, risk landscape & more. 
Course 
Objectives: 
1.   Learn about the mobile security 
2.   Understand the Mobile Web access 
3.   Familiarize about Bluetooth security 
4.   Analyze the mobile application security in IPhone, Windows, etc… 
5.   Design mobile application with security 
 
UNIT  I: Introduction to Mobile Security                                                                       9 
Hrs  
Top Mobile Issues and Development Strategies: Top Issues Facing Mobile Devices, Physical 
Security , Secure Data Storage (on Disk), Strong Authentication with Poor Keyboards , 
Multiple-User Support with Security, Safe Browsing Environment , Secure Operating 
Systems, Application Isolation, Information Disclosure, Virus, Worms, Trojans, Spyware, 
and Malware 
, Difficult Patching/Update Process, Strict Use and Enforcement of SSL, Phishing , Cross
Site Request Forgery (CSRF), Location Privacy/Security, Insecure Device Drivers, Multi 
Factor Authentication, Tips for Secure Mobile Application Development. 
UNIT  II: Mobile Web                                                                                               9 Hrs 
WAP and Mobile HTML Security WAP and Mobile HTML Basics, Authentication on 
WAP/Mobile HTML Sites, Encryption, Application Attacks on Mobile HTML Sites, Cross- 
Site Scripting, SQL Injection, Cross-Site Request Forgery, HTTP Redirects, Phishing, 
Session Fixation, Non-SSL Login, WAP and Mobile Browser Weaknesses, Lack of HTTP 
Only Flag Support, Lack of SECURE Flag Support, Handling Browser Cache, WAP 
Limitations. 
UNIT  III: Bluetooth Security                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Bluetooth Security Overview of the Technology , History and Standards , Common Uses , 
Alternatives, Future, Bluetooth Technical Architecture , Radio Operation and Frequency, 
Bluetooth Network Topology , Device Identification , Modes of Operation , Bluetooth 
Stack 
,Bluetooth Profiles, Bluetooth Security Features , Pairing , Traditional Security Services in 
Bluetooth, Security “Non-Features” , Threats to Bluetooth Devices and Networks, Bluetooth 
Vulnerabilities, Bluetooth Versions Prior to v1.2, Bluetooth Versions Prior to v2.1. 
UNIT  IV: SMS Security                                                                                             9 Hrs 
SMS Security Overview of Short Message Service, Overview of Multimedia Messaging 
Service, Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), Protocol Attacks, Abusing Legitimate 
Functionality, Attacking Protocol Implementations, Application Attacks, iPhone Safari, 
Windows Mobile MMS, Motorola RAZR JPG Overflow, Walkthroughs, Sending PDUs, 
Converting XML to WBXML. 
 
UNIT  V: Enterprise Security                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Enterprise Security on the Mobile OS Device Security Options, PIN, Remote, 346 Secure 
Local Storage, Apple iPhone and Keychain, Security Policy Enforcement, Encryption, Full 
Disk Encryption, E-mail Encryption, File Encryption, Application Sandboxing, Signing, and 
Permissions, Application Sandboxing, Application Signing, Permissions, Buffer Overflow 
Protection, Windows Mobile, iPhone, Android, BlackBerry, Security Feature Summary. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand common mobile application security vulnerabilities. 
2. Define the security controls of multiple mobile operating systems. 
3. Analyse Bluetooth technology. 
4. Design the mobile application with SMS security. 
5. Develop the enterprise mobile application with security 
 
TEXT BOOK: 
1. Mobile Application Security, Himanshu Dwivedi, Chris Clark, David Thiel, TATA 
McGraw Hill. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Mobile and Wireless Network Security and Privacy, Kami S. Makki, et al, Springer. 
2. Android Security Attacks Defences, Abhishek Dubey, CRC Press. 
 
BTST4601e    DATA ANALYTICS FOR FRAUD DETECTION L T  P  C 
3  0  0  3 
   Prerequisite: Probability and Statistics 
Course Description: 
Data analysis is a powerful tool for fraud examiners. By searching for patterns, 
anomalies, trends and outliers, you might discover a cleverly hidden scheme. A skillful 
fraudster is adept at covering his tracks. However, data analytics empowers you to 
uncover even the most thoroughly hidden fraud. This course explores the basics of using 
data analysis to uncover fraud.  
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Discuss the overall process of how data analytics is applied. 
2.   Discuss how data analytics can be used to better address and identify risks. 
3.   Help mitigate risks from fraud and waste for our clients and organizations. 
4.   To perform various test cases to find fraud  
5.   To Apply the test cases on real time applications  
  
UNIT I:          9 Hrs 
Introduction: Defining Fraud, Anomalies versus, Fraud, Types of Fraud, Assess the Risk 
of Fraud, Fraud Detection, Recognizing Fraud, Data Mining versus Data Analysis and 
Analytics, Data Analytical Software, Anomalies versus Fraud within Data, Fraudulent Data 
Inclusions and Deletions. 
UNIT II:           9 Hrs 
The Data Analysis Cycle, Evaluation and Analysis, Obtaining Data Files, Performing the 
Audit, File Format Types, Preparation for Data Analysis, Arranging and Organizing Data, 
Statistics and Sampling, Descriptive Statistics, Inferential Statistics. 
UNIT III:            9 Hrs 
Data Analytical Tests: Benford’s Law, Number Duplication Test, Z-Score, Relative Size 
Factor Test, Same-Same-Same Test, Same-Same-Different Test. 
UNIT IV:          9 Hrs 
Advanced Data Analytical Tests, Correlation, Trend Analysis, GEL-1 and GEL-2, Skimming 
and Cash Larceny, Billing schemes: and Data Familiarization, Benford’s Law Tests, 
Relative Size Factor Test, Match Employee Address to Supplier data. 
UNIT V:           9 Hrs 
Payroll Fraud, Expense Reimbursement Schemes, Register disbursement schemes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course outcomes: 
1.   Formulate reasons for using data analysis to detect fraud. 
2.   Explain characteristics and components of the data and assess its completeness. 
3.   Identify known fraud symptoms and use digital analysis to identify unknown fraud 
symptoms. 
4.   Automate the detection process. 
5.   Verify results and understand how to prosecute fraud. 
  
TEXT BOOK: 
1.   Fraud and Fraud Detection: A Data Analytics Approach by Sunder Gee, Wiley.   
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.   Blokdyk Gerardus, Data analysis techniques for fraud detection, CreateSpace 
Independent Publishing Platform. 
2.   Leonard W. Vona, Fraud Data Analytics Methodology: The Fraud Scenario 
Approach to Uncovering Fraud in Core Business Systems, Wiley. 
BTST4601e                              THREAT INTELLIGENCE                              L T  P  C 
 
Prerequisite: Computer Networks                                                                       3  0  0  3 
Course Description: - This course empowers you with the latest techniques and tools to detect, 
engage, and neutralize cyberattacks in real time. 
Course Objectives 
1.   To learn basic fundamentals of cyber threat intelligence. 
2.   To demonstrate how cyber has changed the nature of intelligence collection. 
3.   To analyze the cyber threats at different levels. 
4.   To learn how to collect cyber threat data. 
5. To validate and prioritize risks involved. 
 
Unit  I: Defining Cyber Threat Intelligence 9 Hrs  
The Need for Cyber Threat Intelligence: The menace of targeted attacks, The monitor-and- 
respond  strategy,  Why  the  strategy  is  failing,  Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  Defined,  Key 
Characteristics:  Adversary  based,  Risk  focused,  Process  oriented,  Tailored  for  diverse 
consumers, The Benefits of Cyber Threat Intelligence. 
 
Unit  II: Developing Cyber Threat Intelligence Requirements:                            9 Hrs 
Assets That Must Be Prioritized: Personal information, Intellectual property, Confidential 
business information, Credentials and IT systems information, Operational systems. 
Adversaries: Cybercriminals, Competitors and cyber espionage agents, Hacktivists. 
Intelligence Consumers: Tactical users, Operational users, Strategic users. 
 
Unit III: Collecting Cyber Threat Information: Level 1:      9 Hrs 
Threat Indicators, File hashes and reputation data, Technical sources: honeypots and scanners, 
Industry sources: malware and reputation feeds. Level 2: Threat Data Feeds, Cyber threat 
statistics, reports, and surveys, Malware analysis. Level 3: Strategic Cyber Threat Intelligence, 
Monitoring the underground, Motivation and intentions, Tactics, techniques, and procedures. 
 
Unit IV: Analyzing and Disseminating Cyber Threat Intelligence:                     9 Hrs 
Information versus Intelligence, Validation and Prioritization: Risk scores, Tags for context, 
Human assessment. Interpretation and Analysis: Reports, Analyst skills, Intelligence platform, 
Customization. Dissemination: Automated feeds and APIs, Searchable knowledge base, 
Tailored reports. 
 
Unit V: Selecting the Right Cyber Threat Intelligence Partner:                         9 Hrs 
Types of Partners: Providers of threat indicators, Providers of threat data feeds, Providers of 
comprehensive cyber threat intelligence 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes 
At the end of the course the students should be able to: 
 
1.   Examine the history and development of cyber intelligence operations and how those 
operations can integrate with other intelligence collection. 
2.   Threat Study the technique to Develop Cyber Threat Intelligence Requirements. 
3.   Evaluate the benefits and risks of the current cyber intelligence structure. 
4.  Use the attributes of computer network exploitation, defense and attack within the 
intelligence context. 
5.   Examine the intelligence challenge of attribution in cyber-attacks. 
 
Text Books 
1.   Friedman, J., & Bouchard, M. (2015). Definitive Guide to Cyber Threat Intelligence: 
Using Knowledge about Adversaries to Win the War against Targeted Attacks. 
CyberEdge Group. 
2.  Dalziel, H. (2014). How to define and build an effective cyber threat intelligence 
capability. Syngress. 
 
 
Reference Books 
1.   Robertson, J., Diab, A., Marin, E., Nunes, E., Paliath, V., Shakarian, J., & Shakarian, 
P. (2017). Darkweb cyber threat intelligence mining. Cambridge University Press. 
Gourley Bob, 2014, ―The Cyber Threat‖, Create space Independent Pub. 
 
BTST4602a SECURITY ASSESSMENT and RISK ANALYSIS L  T  P  C 
3   0   0  3 
Prerequisite: - Network Security 
 
Course Description: - The course will provide an in-depth understanding of the security risk 
in software. The course covers the essential concepts, methodologies, and frameworks used in 
software design. The course will additionally cover the security framework on real time 
applications such as e-business and e-service systems. 
 
COURSE OBJECTIVES 
1.   The course takes a software development perspective to the challenges of engineering 
software systems that are secure. 
2.   This course addresses design and implementation issues critical to producing secure 
software systems. 
3.   The course deals with the question of how to make the requirements for confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability integral to the software development process. 
4.   Secure  software  requirements  gathering  to  design,  development,  configuration, 
deployment, and ongoing maintenance 
5.   Security of enterprise information systems. 
 
UNIT I: Introduction 9 Hrs 
Defining computer security, the principles of secure software, trusted computing base, etc, 
threat  modeling,  advanced  techniques  for  mapping  security  requirements  into  design 
specifications. Secure software implementation, deployment and ongoing management. 
UNIT II: Security Design 9 Hrs 
Software design and an introduction to hierarchical design representations. Difference between 
high-level and detailed design. Handling security with high-level design. General Design 
Notions. Security concerns designs at multiple levels of abstraction, Design patterns, quality 
assurance activities and strategies that support early vulnerability detection, Trust models, 
security Architecture & design reviews. 
UNIT III: Software Assurance Model                                                                         9 Hrs 
Identify project security risks & selecting risk management strategies, Risk Management 
Framework, Security Best practices/ Known Security Flaws, Architectural risk analysis, 
Security Testing & Reliability (Penn testing, Risk- Based Security Testing 
UNIT IV: Application                                                                                                    9  Hrs  
Software Security in Enterprise Business: Identification and authentication, Enterprise 
Information Security, Symmetric and asymmetric cryptography, including public key 
cryptography, data encryption standard (DES), advanced encryption standard (AES), 
algorithms for hashes and message digests. Authentication, authentication schemes , access 
control models, Kerberos protocol, public key infrastructure (PKI), protocols specially 
designed for e-commerce and web applications, firewalls and VPNs. 
 
  
UNIT V: Security Frameworks                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Security development frameworks. Security issues associated with the development and 
deployment of information systems, including Internet-based e-commerce, e-business, and e- 
service systems. 
 
COURSE OUTCOMES: 
1. Understand various aspects and principles of software security. 
 
2. Devise security models for implementing at the design level. 
 
3. Identify and analyze the risks associated with s/w engineering and use relevant models to 
mitigate the risks. 
4. Understand the various security algorithms to implement for secured computing and 
computer networks 
5. Explain different security frameworks for different types of systems including electronic 
systems. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
 
1. W. Stallings, Cryptography and network security: Principles and practice, 5 th Edition, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall., 2011 
2. C. Kaufman, r. Perlman, & M. Speciner, Network security: Private communication in a 
public world, 2 nd Edition, Upper Saddle River, Prentice Hall, 2002 
3. C. P. Pfleeger, S. L. Pfleeger, Security in Computing, 4 th Edition, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ:Prentice Hall, 2007 
4. M. Merkow, & J. Breithaupt, Information security: Principles and practices. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ:Prentice Hall, 2005 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Gary McGraw, Software Security: Building Security In, Addison-Wesley, 2006 
BTST4602b       BLOCKCHAIN SECURITY AND PERFORMANCE L T P C 
      3 0  0 3 
Prerequisite: Cryptography and Network Security 
Course Description: This course introduces blockchain security issues, including a 
description of how the blockchain works at higher level. The Course will provide the 
explanation with various security tools and study about the various issues related performance. 
This course finally provides the real time applications of blockchain. 
Course Objectives: 
1.   Understand the security issues of blockchain. 
2.   Use tools to tackle the security related issues of blockchain. 
3.   Analyse the various issues related to performance 
4.   Implement the techniques to improve performance 
5.   Apply the techniques on real time applications 
 
UNIT –I: Security Issues          9 Hrs 
Blockchain Related Issues, Higher-Level Language (Solidity) Related Issues, EVM Bytecode 
Related Issues, Real-Life Attacks on Blockchain Applications/Smart Contracts, Trusted 
Execution Environments. 
UNIT II: Security Tools for Smart Contracts           9 Hrs 
Working, Advantages, And Disadvantages of Tools- Oyente, Securify, Maian, Manticore, 
Mythril, SmartCheck, Verx. Secure Key Management, Quantum Resilience Keys. 
UNIT III: Performance Related Issues          9 Hrs 
Transaction Speed, Transaction Fees, Network Size, Complexity, Interoperability Problems, 
Lack of Standardization. Lack of Supportive Regulations Related to Blockchain Applications. 
UNIT IV: Performance Improvements           9 Hrs 
Off-Chain   State   Channels, Sidechains, Parallels   Chains, Concurrent   Smart   Contract 
Transactions, Sharding Technique and Its Benefits, Atomic Swaps Between Smart Contracts. 
UNIT V: Blockchain Applications          9 Hrs 
Decentralized Cryptocurrency, Distributed Cloud Storage, E-Voting, Insurance Claims, Cross- 
Border Payments, Asset Management, Smart Appliances. 8 Course Outcomes: 
 
Course Outcomes 
Upon completion of the course, the students will be able to: 
1. Understand the security perspective of blockchain technology. 
2. Learn and apply security analysis and performance-enhancing techniques related to 
blockchain. 
3. Understand the real-life applications of blockchain technology and apply it to provide 
solutions to some real-life problems. 
4. Understand the performance of blockchain 
5. Implement blockchain for various use cases 
 
 
  
Text Book(s) 
 
1. Mastering Ethereum: Building Smart Contracts and Dapps Book by Andreas 
Antonopoulos and Gavin Wood, Shroff Publisher/O′Reilly Publisher, 2018. 
2. Arvind Narayanan, Joseph Bonneau, Edward Felten, Andrew Miller and Steven 
Goldfeder, “Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies: A Comprehensive Introduction”, 
Princeton University Press, July, 2016. 
 
Reference Book(s) 
1. Sachin Shetty, Charles A. Kamhoua, Laurent L. Njilla, Blockchain for Distributed 
Systems Security, Wiely, 2019 
2. Rahul Neware Dr. Brajesh Kumar, Er. Parag Rastogi, Dr. Harshal Patil, 
BLOCKCHAIN SECURITY, Book Rivers; 1st edition, 2022 
3. Yassine Maleh , Mohammad Shojafar , Mamoun Alazab , Imed Romdhani, Blockchain 
ForCybersecurity And Privacy: Architectures Challenges And Applications, Taylor & 
Francis Ltd, 2020 
Corresponding Online Resources:  
 https://www.edx.org/course/blockchain-and  fintech- basics-applications-and
limitations 
BTST4602c DIGITAL WATERMARKING AND STEGANOGRAPHY     L  T  P  C 
3  0  0  3 
Prerequisite: Basic concept of Mathematics and Computer Security 
 
Course Description: This course provides a insight to steganography techniques,  
Watermarking techniques along with attacks on data hiding and integrity of data. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To learn about the watermarking models and message coding. 
2.   To learn about watermark security and authentication. 
3.   To learn about steganography. Perceptual models. 
4.   To impart ability to design and implement secure watermarking based digital  
      Communication 
5.   Learn how to formulate and design a watermarking based application. 
  
UNIT I          9 Hrs 
Introduction: Information Hiding, Steganography and Watermarking – History of 
watermarking– Importance of digital watermarking – Applications – Properties – 
Evaluating watermarking systems. 
Watermarking models & message coding: Notation – Communications – 
Communication based models – Geometric models – Mapping messages into message 
vectors – Error correction coding – Detecting multi-symbol watermarks. 
 
UNIT II          9 Hrs 
Watermarking with side information & analyzing errors: Informed Embedding – 
Informed Coding– Structured dirty-paper codes - Message errors – False positive errors – 
False negative errors –ROC curves – Effect of whitening on error rates. 
 
UNIT III          9 Hrs 
Perceptual models: Evaluating perceptual impact – General form of a perceptual model – Examples of perceptual models – Robust watermarking approaches - Redundant 
Embedding, Spread Spectrum Coding, Embedding in Perceptually significant 
coefficients. 
 
UNIT IV          9 Hrs 
Watermark security & authentication: Security requirements – Watermark security and 
cryptography– Attacks – Exact authentication – Selective authentication – Localization 
Restoration. 
 
UNIT V          9 Hrs 
Steganography: Steganography communication – Notation and terminology – 
Information Theoretic Foundations of steganography – Practical steganographic methods – Minimizing the embedding impact- Steganalysis 
  
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Know the History and importance of watermarking and steganography. 
2.   Analyse Applications and properties of watermarking and steganography. 
3.   Demonstrate Models and algorithms of watermarking. 
4.   Possess the passion for acquiring knowledge and skill in preserving authentication of 
Information. 
5.   Identify theoretic foundations of steganography and steganalysis.    
TEXT BOOK: 
1. Ingemar J. Cox, Matthew L. Miller, Jeffrey A. Bloom, Jessica Fridrich, Ton Kalker, 
“Digital Watermarking and Steganography”, Margan Kaufmann Publishers, New 
York, 2008. 
 
REFERENCE BOOK: 
 
1. Ingemar J. Cox, Matthew L. Miller, Jeffrey A. Bloom, “Digital Watermarking”, 
Margan Kaufmann Publishers, New York, 2003. 
BTST4602d                                         Healthcare Analytics                             L T P C 
                                                                                                                              3  0 0 3 
Prerequisite: Probability and Statistics  
Course Description: The ability to understand, Analyse, and interpret businesses from 
data has become increasingly important in the healthcare area. Big data analytics is 
becoming central to the healthcare industry, both regarding delivering effective 
outcomes and controlling escalating costs. Health analytics encompasses the 
technologies and skills used to deliver business, clinical, and programmatic insights into 
the complex interdependencies that drive medical outcomes, costs, and oversight. 
Through modelling, optimization, predictive analytics, and business intelligence, 
organizations can gain insights to strengthen financial and budgetary performance, 
deepen consumer-centric relationships and improve the way healthcare is conceived and 
delivered for better outcomes across the entire spectrum of health industries  
Course objectives: 
1. To explore the various forms of electronic health care information. 
2. To learn the techniques adopted to analyse health care data.  
3. To understand the predictive models for clinical data  
4. To learn analytical methods and tools  
5. To apply analytical method on real time applications  
UNIT I          9 Hrs 
Introduction: Introduction to Healthcare Data Analytics- Electronic Health Records– 
Components of EHR- Coding Systems- Benefits of EHR- Barrier to Adopting HER 
Challenges- Phenotyping Algorithms.  
UNIT II          9 Hrs  
Analysis: Biomedical Image Analysis- Mining of Sensor Data in Healthcare- Biomedical 
Signal Analysis- Genomic Data Analysis for Personalized Medicine. 
 UNIT II           9 Hrs 
Natural Language Processing and Data Mining for Clinical Text- Mining the 
Biomedical-Social Media Analytics for Healthcare.  
UNIT IV           9 Hrs 
Advanced Data Analytics: Advanced Data Analytics for Healthcare– Review of Clinical 
Prediction Models- Temporal Data Mining for Healthcare Data- Visual Analytics for 
Healthcare- Predictive Models for Integrating Clinical and Genomic Data- Information 
Retrieval for Healthcare- Privacy-Preserving Data Publishing Methods in Healthcare.  
UNIT V           9 Hrs 
Applications: Applications and Practical Systems for Healthcare– Data Analytics for 
Pervasive Health- Fraud Detection in Healthcare- Data Analytics for Pharmaceutical 
Discoveries- Clinical Decision Support Systems- Computer-Assisted Medical Image 
Analysis Systems- Mobile Imaging and Analytics for Biomedical Data 
Course Outcomes:  
1. Discuss the type of healthcare dataset(s) used in healthcare  
2. Analyse health care data using appropriate analytical techniques.  
3. Apply analytics for decision making in healthcare services.  
4. Apply data mining to integrate health data from multiple sources and develop 
efficient clinical decision support systems. 
5. Examine data analytics for fraud detection in healthcare. 
Text Books(s)  
1. Chandan K. Reddy and Charu C Aggarwal, “Healthcare data analytics”, Taylor 
& Francis, 2015  
Reference Book(s)  
1. Hui Yang and Eva K. Lee, “Healthcare Analytics: From Data to Knowledge to 
Healthcare 
2. Christo El Morr Hossam Ali-Hassan Analytics in Healthcare A Practical 
Introduction Course 
BTST4602e OPERATING SYSTEMS SECURITY L  T  P  C 
3  0  0  3 
Prerequisite: Operating Systems 
 
Course Description: The objective of this course is to provide an in-depth introduction to the 
security issues - including vulnerabilities, threats, exploits and defense mechanisms in 
operating systems. Topics covered include viruses, accounting, firewalls and etc. The course 
emphasizes on real world vulnerabilities such as Sun Microsystem, Solaris, etc.. 
 
COURSE OBJECTIVES 
1. To identify and assess current and anticipated security risks and vulnerabilities 
2. To monitor, evaluate and test security conditions and environment 
3. To develop an organizational security plan that provides for periodic reviews of 
security policies and procedures 
4. To Implement security plan and monitor solutions 
5. To understand Respond to any breach of security and adjust organizational security 
plan accordingly 
 
UNIT I: Introduction to Security                                                                               9 Hrs 
Operating Systems and Network Security, Computer Networks and Security Careers in 
Information Security, Why Security Is Necessary Protecting Information and Resources, 
Ensuring Privacy, Facilitating Work flow Addressing Security Holes or Software Bugs 
Compensating for Human Error or Neglect, Cost Factors, Types of Attacks, Hardening your 
systems 
 
UNIT II: Viruses      9 Hrs 
Introduction to virus, Worms, and Malicious Software How Viruses, Worms, and Trojan 
Horses Spread, Virus, worms, trojan horse, typical methods used by malicious software, 
protecting  an  OS  from  malicious  software,  Different  Encryption   methods,  different 
authentication methods, Attacks on encryption and authentications 
 
UNIT III: Account based security    9 Hrs 
Account Naming and Security Policies, Creating User Accounts: Windows2000 Professional 
and Windows XP Professional, Windows2000 Server and Windows Server2003,  RedHat 
Linux9x, NetWare6.x, Mac OSX, Setting Account Policies and Configuring Logon Security 
 
UNIT IV: Firewalls and Border security     9 Hrs 
An Overview of TCP UDP and IP, Understanding Transmission Control 
Protocol(TCP),Understanding User Datagram Protocol(UDI),Understanding How the Internet 
Protocol(IP) Works, How IP Addressing Works, Using a Subnet Mask, Creating Subnetworks 
Border and Firewall Security, Packet Filtering, Network Address Translation(NAT) 
 
UNIT V: Case studies                                                                                                    9 Hrs  
Case Study Solaris Trusted Extensions :Glenn Faden and Christoph Schuba, Sun 
Microsystems, Inc , Trusted Extensions Access Control, Solaris Compatibility , Trusted 
Extensions Mediation , Process Rights Management (Privileges ) , Privilege Bracketing and 
Relinquishing, Controlling Privilege Escalation, Assigned Privileges and Safeguards , Role- 
based Access Control (RBAC) ,RBAC Authorizations ,Rights Profiles , Users and Roles 
,Converting the Superuser to a Role ,Trusted Extensions Networking, Trusted Extensions 
Multilevel Services, Trusted Extensions Administration   
Case Study:  Building a Secure Operating System for Linux, Linux Security Modules. 
 
 
 
COURSE OUTCOMES 
 
1.   Understand the importance of security 
2.   Analyse the various virus to affect the OS 
3.   Analyse the security issues in various environment 
4.   Develop ability to protect operating systems 
5.   Improve the security of operating systems from malicious software 
 
 
 
 
Text Book: 
1. Guide to Operating systems security- Michel (2004) 2. Operating Systems Security 
(Synthesis Lectures on Information Security, Privacy, and Trust) Trent Jaeger (2008) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Guide to Operating Systems- Michael Walters (2006) 2. Modern operating systems 
4e- Tanenbaum 
BTSL4501 DIGITAL FORENSICS LAB L T P C 
0  0 2 1 
  Prerequisite: Cyber Security 
Course Description: This course is designed to give students the tools and techniques for 
investigating crime involving digital evidence. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To provide students with a comprehensive overview of collecting, investigating, 
preserving, and presenting evidence of cybercrime left in digital storage devices, 
emails, browsers, mobile devices using different Forensics tools. 
2.   To Understand file system basics and where hidden files may lie on the disk, as well as how 
to extract the data and preserve it for analysis. 
3.   Understand some of the tools of e-discovery. 
4.   To understand the network analysis, Registry analysis 
5.   Analyze attacks using different forensics tools. 
 
List of Experiments 
1. Perform email analysis using the tools like Exchange EDB viewer, MBOX viewer and 
View user mailboxes and public folders, Filter the mailbox data based on various 
criteria, Search for particular items in user mailboxes and public folders 
2. Perform Browser history analysis and get the downloaded content, history, saved 
logins, searches, websites visited etc. using Foxton Forensics tool, Dumpzilla. 
3. Perform mobile analysis in the form of retrieving call logs, SMS log, all contacts list 
using the forensics tool like SAFT 
4. Perform Registry analysis and get boot time logging using process monitor tool 
5. Perform Disk imaging and cloning the using the X-way Forensics tools 
6. Perform Data Analysis i.e History about open file and folder, and view 
folder actions using Last view activity tool 
7. Perform Network analysis using the Network Miner tool. 
8. Perform information for incident response using the crowd Response tool 
9. Perform File type detection using Autopsy tool 
10. Perform Memory capture and analysis using the Live RAM capture or any forensic 
tool 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Learn the importance of a systematic procedure for investigation of data found on 
digital storage media that might provide evidence of wrong-doing. 
2. To Learn the file system storage mechanisms and retrieve files in hidden format. 
3.  Learn the use of computer forensics tools used in data analysis. 
4. Learn how to find data that may be clear or hidden on a computer disk, find out the 
open ports for the attackers through network analysis, Registry analysis. 
5.  Apply different computer forensic tools to a given cybercrime scene 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. Real Digital Forensics for Handheld Devices, E. P. Dorothy, Auerback Publications, 
2013. 
2. The Basics of Digital Forensics: The Primer for Getting Started in Digital Forensics, 
J. Sammons, Syngress Publishing, 2012. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Handbook of Digital Forensics and Investigation, E. Casey, Academic Press, 2010. 
2. Malware Forensics Field Guide for Windows Systems: Digital Forensics Field 
Guides, C. H. Malin, E. Casey and J. M. Aquilina, Syngress, 2012. 
3. The Best Damn Cybercrime and Digital Forensics Book Period, J. Wiles and A. Reyes, 
Syngress, 2007. 
  
BTSL4501 
BIG DATA ANALYTICS LAB                          
              L
 T P C 
0 0 2 1 
Prerequisite: DBMS 
Course Description 
This course mainly focuses in dealing with large-scale data analytics. It deals with cluster 
computing software tools and programming techniques. This course covers the basic 
systems and techniques to handle large volumes of data and modern systems on MapReduce 
such as Hadoop MapReduce and Apache Spark. Students shall explore to implement various 
algorithms and execute them on cluster environment. 
Course Objectives 
 To understand the basic programming constructs of Hadoop and HDFS. 
 To define and solve big data problems using Map Reduce Technique in HADOOP. 
 To Analyse the Map Reduce programs for Query processing using Hive. 
 To Analyse the Apache Spark for Map Reduce programming.  
 To apply Spark API-MLib for machine learning operations. 
Task 1: 
Write a java map-reduce program for counting the number of occurrences of each word in a 
text file. 
a) Understanding the Hortonworks Sandbox for Hadoop. 
b) Installing Hortonworks Sandbox – Sun virtual box/VMware Player on Windows 
Task 2: 
Understanding and working with basic HDFS operations such as:  
• Starting HDFS services,  
• Listing files in HDFS.    
• Adding files and directories. 
•  Retrieving files.  
• Deleting files. 
• Shutting down the HDFS services. 
Task 3: 
Understanding and Working with Ambari for provision, manage and monitor a Hadoop 
cluster, and also to integrate Hadoop with the existing enterprise infrastructure. 
Task 4: 
Task 5:  
Write a java map-reduce program for mining healthcare data and perform various analysis 
on healthcare dataset.  
 
Task 6: 
Working with HBase: 
Creating, Disabling, Enabling, Describing, Exists, Drop a Table, etc., using HBase Shell 
 
Task 7:   
Working with HBase to perform following operation: 
Creating, Update, Read, Delete, Scan, Count and Truncate 
 
Task 8: Installation of Apache PySpark and performing basic operations 
 
Task 9: Develop PySpark program with attributes of SparkConf.  
 
Task 10: Working with PySpark SQL and DataFrames. 
 
Task 11: Working with Apache Spark Machine Learning API - MLlib.  
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand the basic programming constructs of Hadoop and HDFS. 
2. Solve Big data problems using Map Reduce Technique in HADOOP. 
3. Analyse the Map Reduce programs for Query processing using Hive. 
4. Apply analytics on big data streams using Hadoop Streaming API. 
5. Apply Spark API-MLib for machine learning operations. 
 
  
Reference Books: 
1. Ramcharan, K., Sundar, K., Alla, S. (2020). Applied data science using PySpark: 
Learn the end-to-end predictive model-building cycle Apress. 
2. Nudurupati, S. (2021). Essential PySpark for scalable data analytics: A beginner's 
guide to harnessing the power and ease of PySpark 3 Packt Publishing. 
3. Perrin, J. (2020). Spark in action (2nd ed.). (Covers Apache Spark 3 with examples 
in Java, Python, and Scala) O'Reilly Media Inc. 
4. Damji, J., Wenig, B., Das, T., Lee, D. (2020). Learning spark (2nd ed.) O'Reilly 
Media Inc. 
5. Leskovec, J. Rajaraman, A., Ullman, J. (2014). Mining of massive datasets. 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Web References: 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/106/104/106104189/ 
2. https://hadoop.apache.org/docs/ 
3. https://spark.apache.org/docs 