 
 
BACHELOR OF PHYSIOTHERAPY 
(w.e.f. 2022-23 admitted batch) 
 
 
 
 
Course Structure and Syllabi 
 
 
 
 
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
MURUKAMBATTU - CHITTOOR (Dt) 517127 
ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
 
PROGRAM OUTCOMES (PO) 
PO 1:Enable student to gain adequate knowledge, skills andclinical hands-on experience 
leading to an ability to establish independent 
professionalpracticeinthespecializedareasofinterest. 
PO 2:Gatherandinterpretinformationwithinaholisticframeworkpertainingtohealth. 
PO 3: The 
overallcontentofthecurriculumfocusesonlearningexperiencesandclinicaleducationexperiencesf
oreachstudent 
PO 4:Ethical, evidence-based, efficient Physiotherapy treatment of adult as well as 
pediatricpatients/clientswithanarrayofcondition(e.g. Musculoskeletal, neuromuscular, 
cardiovascular/pulmonary, integumentary 
etc)acrossthelifespanandthecontinuumofcare,toallpeopleirrespectiveofgender,caste,nation,stat
esandterritories,region,minoritygroupsorothergroups. 
PO 5:Ability to operate as independent practitioners, as well as members of health 
serviceprovider teams, act as first contact practitioners, from whom patients/clients may 
seekdirectserviceswithoutreferralfromanotherhealthcareprofessional. 
PROGRAM EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES (PEO): 
PEO1: Ability to prevent 
movementdisordersormaintain/restoreoptimalfunctionandqualityoflifeinindividualswithmove
ment disorders. 
PEO2: Ability 
topromotethehealthandwellbeingofindividualsandthegeneralpublic/society,emphasizingtheim
portanceofphysicalactivityandexercise 
PEO3:Impartskillinteaching,management,research,guidanceand counselling. 
PEO4:Inculcatemoralandethicalvalues 
PEO5:Abilitytocarryout research Projects 
PEO6: PromotePhysiotherapyeducation. 
PEO7:Applyscientificprinciplestotheconceptsofhealth,illnessanddisability 
PROGRAM SPECIFIC OUTCOMES (PSO): 
PSO1: Conduct independent,interdisciplinary,multiandtrans-disciplinarynovelresearch in 
physiotherapy. 
PSO2:Communicateeffectivelywithuseofdifferentmeanstotheprofessionalcolleagues,counterp
arts,patientsand theircaregivers. 
PSO3: Apply evidence-based 
specialityphysiotherapypracticewithappropriatecriticalandclinicalreasoning skills. 
PSO4:Reviewtheclinicaloutcomeswithnewapproachesinadvancedphysiotherapypracticebased
oncurrenttrendsanddocumentinappropriatearea. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS 
SCOPE: 
This Academic regulation provide a framework for the regulatory guidelines of all programs 
offered by The Apollo University. It includes procedures and practices that are to be 
followed to ensure academic standards in the University. The regulations are approved by the 
Academic Council. These regulations may be amended from time to time with the approval of 
the Academic council for the benefit of students or some times to reflect the changes 
suggested by the statutory bodies.  
Information regarding amendments (if any) to the regulations will be communicated to the 
students by publishing in the University website. Students must follow the amended 
regulations as they might impact the process for the award of degree. The decision of the Vice 
Chancellor shall be the final in case of any discrepancy. These regulations apply to all 
students, despite the program of study. 
 
1. ADMISSION INTO THE PROGRAM 
The University admits the students in two modes. One through the convenor quota as per the 
Andhra Pradesh Private Universities Act, for which the admissions will be carried out through 
the convener quota by the Govt of Andhra Pradesh. The other is through University quota for 
which the following procedure will be followed: 
A. The applicant shall satisfy the entrance requirements specified by The Apollo 
University and in accordance with guidelines of statutory councils for Under
graduation.  
B. The Applicant shall be qualified in the qualifying examination for a particular 
program. 
C. The Applicant secures a rank in national level entrance exam or suitable such test 
conducted by The Apollo University / professional body.  
D. The Applicant qualifies in the specified state or national level examinations prescribed 
by The Apollo University. 
 
The Apollo University will widely notify the counselling schedule for admissions into the 
academic programs in the media. The provisional admission will be given to the eligible 
students during the counselling scheduled by The Apollo University. The selected candidates 
will be provisionally admitted into the program of his/her choice if the candidate meets 
the program specific requirements in addition to academic performance qualifying 
exam. Admission is purely based on merit and so merely meeting the requirements will not 
ensure admission. The University does not discriminate based on gender, race, region, 
religion, disability or nationality.   The University reserves the right to make admissions based 
on various criteria which is specified in the admission brochure.   
 
2. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
Undergraduate programs  
The qualifying exam eligibility for each program is given Annexure 1.The student 
should have passed the qualifying exam either in the year the student is seeking 
admission or the previous year.  
Convener Quota: The student seeking admission to any program under convener 
quota shall qualify in the relevant entrance exam conducted by the Government of 
Andhra Pradesh. 
University Quota:  For getting admission under University quota, percentage of 
marks obtained in the qualifying exam, the rank obtained in TAU entrance exam or 
any recognized national level examination in the year of admission will be considered.  
 
Counselling 
All the eligible students need to apply for admission and have to attend counselling 
conducted by TAU as per the schedule for the university quo 
3. PROGRAMS 
The Apollo University offers variety of programs which includes certificate, undergraduate, 
postgraduate, and Research.  The list of programs on offer for the academic year 2022-23  are 
annexed in Annexure 2 and those of 2023-24 are annexed in Annexure 3. 
Minimum duration of the program 
The minimum duration of each program depends on the type of program, viz., undergraduate, 
postgraduate, integrated programs, etc., and the faculty which offers the program. The 
maximum duration of the program is N+2 years, where N stands for the minimum duration of 
the program as mentioned in Annexure 2 and 3. If the student has not obtained the minimum 
number of credits within the stipulated time, the Vice-Chancellor may extend the maximum 
duration in extenuating circumstances upon receiving a request along with reasons from the 
student for not completing the program on time. 
 
4. CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM 
The choice-based credit system (CBCS) facilitates the education student-centric. It provides 
the opportunity for the learner to choose the courses from a basket of core, elective, and skill 
enhanced courses. All programs of study are designed to meet the specified number of credit 
requirements. The courses taken by the student in each semester as part of program are 
allotted some credit points based on the number of hours assigned. Upon successful 
completion of the course, the student secures the number of credits allotted for that course. 
Once the minimum number of credits of the program is achieved, the degree can be awarded, 
subject to fulfilment of all other relevant conditions. 
 
5. STRUCTURE OF THE PROGRAM 
The Program structure Consists of 
i) University Courses 
 A. University Core 
 B. University Electives 
ii) Faculty Courses 
 A. Faculty Core 
 B. Faculty Electives  
iii) Program Courses 
 A. Program Core 
 B. Program electives  
Each course* is assigned a certain number of credits depending upon the number of contact 
hours (lectures/tutorials/practical) per week.  (*one course means one subject) 
Core Courses = 3 Credits /4 Credits   Elective =3 Credits 
In general, credits are assigned to the courses as detailed below: 
 A classroom lecture/ tutorial of 60 min (1 hr) duration per week, spread over the 
entire semester, shall be considered as one credit.  
 A laboratory session of minimum of 120 min (2 hr) per week shall be considered as 
one credit.  
 A project work/ Internship session of 60 minutes (1 hr) carried out per week shall 
be considered as one credit. 
6. MEDIUM OF INSTRUCTION 
The medium of instruction (including examinations and project reports) shall be English. 
7. REGISTRATION 
Any of the following student must register for the courses opted in a particular semester 
during the scheduled registration period.  
i. a new student who enrolls into any program  
ii. an existing student who is continuing on rolls from the preceding regular semester  
iii. a former student, i.e., who has not enrolled in the preceding regular semester or who 
has availed academic break or detained and got readmission  
 
Each newly admitted student shall attend an induction/ orientation program prior to 
commencement of the first semester. During this program academic advisors assist the 
students in choosing the courses. Existing student may register online by using their 
registration number and mail ID through the Apollo ERP portal. Class schedules are 
available approximately two weeks before the beginning of every semester for each program. 
The concerned head of the department must approve class schedule.   
 
8. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS 
 Students should earn a minimum of 80% attendance in the current semester to become 
eligible to write the Semester End Examinations. 
 The monthly statement of attendance will be displayed on the Department Notice 
Board/ Apollo ERP by the respective departments within the first five working days of 
the following month. 
 Candidates who are falling short of 80% attendance will be detained on the 
recommendation of the HoD and are not eligible to appear for the current semester 
examinations. The students who are detained in the current semester will not be 
allowed to register for the next semester and they have to repeat the same semester by 
paying the tuition fee prescribed. However, they can write arrear subjects, if any.  
 
9. EVALUATION 
The assessment of the student’s performance in a Theory course shall be based on two 
components: Continuous Evaluation (40 marks) and Semester-end examination (60 marks). A 
student has to secure an aggregate of 40% in the course in the two components put together to 
be declared to have passed the course, subject to the condition that the candidate must have 
secured a minimum of 24 marks (i.e. 40%) in the theory component at the semester-end 
examination. Practical/ Project Work/ Industrial Training/ Viva voce/ Seminar etc. are 
completely assessed under Continuous Evaluation for a maximum of 100 marks, and a student 
has to obtain a minimum of 50% to secure Pass Grade. For courses having both theory and 
practical components, 60% of the weightage will be given for theory component and 40% 
weightage for practical component. The student must secure 40% (Theory + Practical) with 
24 marks minimum in theory to attain pass grade.  
Details of Assessment Procedure are furnished below in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Assessment Procedure 
S. No. Component of 
Assessment 
Marks 
Allotted 
Type of 
Assessment 
Scheme of Evaluation 
1 Theory 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Continuous 
Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i) Twenty (20) marks for mid 
examinations. Three mid examinations 
shall be conducted for 20 marks each; 
average of the best two performances shall 
be taken into consideration. 
ii) Ten (10) marks for Quizzes, 
Assignments and Presentations.  
iii) Ten (10) marks for   periodic 
evaluation, case studies and projects  
 
iv) Sixty (60) marks for Semester-end 
examinations 
60 Semester-end 
Examination 
 Total 100   
2 Laboratory 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
1)80 marks with equal weightage to all 
experiments subject to conduct of 
minimum of 10 experiments  
2)20marks for the end exam (with one of 
our university teachers as external other 
than course teacher) 
3 Clinical training 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
i) (80) marks for periodic evaluation  
of Internship report by the Project 
Supervisor. 
ii) Twenty (20) marks for final Report 
presentation and Viva-voce, by a panel of 
internal examiners. 
iii) Students shall undergo TWO 
internships during the course of time and 
the evaluation shall be done during final 
semester. 
4 Project work  100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
iv) (80) marks for periodic evaluation 
and technical report writing by the Project 
Supervisor. 
ii) Twenty (20) marks for final Report 
presentation and Viva-voce, by a panel of 
internal examiners 
5 Students Seminars  100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
Each student has to give a seminar on any 
topic in consultation with the faculty 
member in charge A detailed report shall 
be submitted to the in charge. 
60 marks for periodic evaluation including 
report preparation and 40 marks for viva 
voce by a panel of examiners. 
 
GRADING SYSTEM 
Based on the student performance during a given semester, a final letter grade will be 
awarded at the end of the semester in each course. The letter grades and the corresponding 
grade points are as given inTable2. 
Table 2: Grades & Grade Points 
 
SEMESTER GRADEPOINTAVERAGE (SGPA) 
A Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) for the semester will be calculated according to the 
formula: 
Sl. No. Grade Grade Points Absolute Marks 
1 O(Outstanding) 10 90 and above 
2 A+(Excellent) 9 80 to 89 
3 A (Very Good) 8 70 to 79 
4 B+(Good) 7 60 to 69 
5 B (Above Average) 6 50 to 59 
6 C(Average) 5 45 to 49 
7 P(Pass) 4 40 to 44 
8 F(Fail) 0 Less than 40 
9 Ab. (Absent) 0 - 
𝑆𝐺𝑃𝐴∑ [ 𝐶 𝑋 𝐺 ]
∑ 𝐶 
Where 
C=number of credits for the course, 
G=grade points obtained by the student in the course. 
A student who earns a minimum of 4 grade points (P grade) in a course is declared to have 
successfully completed the course, and is deemed to have earned the credits assigned to that 
course. 
CUMULATIVE GRADE POINT AVEARGE (CGPA) 
A similar formula is used to arrive at Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA), considering 
the student’s performance in all the courses taken in all the semesters up to the particular 
point of time. 
Table 3 shows the CGPA required for the award of class after the successful completion of 
the program. 
Table3: CGPA required for award of Class 
Class CGPA Required 
First Class with Distinction >8.0* 
First Class >6.5 
Second Class >5.5 
Pass Class >5.0 
 
*In addition to the required CGPA of 8.0 or more, the student must have necessarily passed 
all the courses of every semester in first attempt. 
 
11. REAPPEARANCE 
a. A student who has secured ‘F’ grade in a Theory course shall have to reappear at 
the subsequent Semester end examination held for that course. 
b. A student who has secured ‘F’ grade in a Practical course shall have to attend 
Special Instruction Classes scheduled by the Department for securing pass. 
c. A student who has secured ‘F’ Grade in Internship /Project work / Industrial 
Training etc shall have to reappear for Viva – voce scheduled by the department. 
d. A student who is declared fail (F) in a course/s can apply for revaluation within 
one week from the date of publication of results with a fee prescribed by the 
university. The marks /grade awarded in the revaluation is final. 
 
11.1 Procedure for revaluation 
 The students who have not satisfied with the marks awarded by the examiner 
            can apply for revaluation of his/her answer script/s  
 The students have to apply through proper channel for revaluation and to pay the 
revaluation fee per paper to the university towards revaluation fee. 
 Students have to apply for revaluation within 7 days from the date  
           publication of result. 
 The scripts will get valued by second examiner and if the difference is more than  
15 marks, they will get valued by the third examiner. The average of the nearest 
two marks will be declared as the final marks. 
 
11.2 ASSESSMENT MECHANISM 
 The Apollo University offers a student the benefits of Choice Based 
Credit System. Every paper is allotted a certain number of credits as per the 
UGC norms. A student is awarded the specified credits on obtaining a pass in 
the respective paper. 
The Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) has been adopted for UG Course 
from the year 2021-22 onwards as per the recommendations of the A.P. State 
Council for Higher Education (APSCHE). The structure of undergraduate 
programmes provides a wide range of choice for students to opt for courses 
based on their eligibility, aptitude and career goals. 
11.3 Semester End Examination 
The End semester examination will be a comprehensive examination of 3 
hours duration. Two End Semester examinations are conducted in a year- 
Odd semester examinations in November/ December and  
Even semester examination in May/June  
Practical examination / Project viva will be held 2 weeks prior to the theory 
semester end examinations. 
Under-Graduation Programs  
 
Course 
 
Continuous Assessment 
 
End semester 
Aggregate in 
End semester 
Examinations 
All UG Courses No passing minimum 40% 40% 
 
11.4 Post Evaluation Programme:  
Under the Post Evaluation Programme there are three menus: 
 Provision for improvement 
 Re-totalling and Revaluation of answer scripts 
 Restrictions to appear for the examinations 
 
11.5 Provision for improvement 
A student who passes a paper in the first attempt can reappear for the same paper in 
the succeeding End-of-Semester examination only, for improving his/her marks. Re
appearance for improvement is allowed for theory and practical subjects of all 
semesters, except for the final semester subjects. Revised mark statement will be 
issued after withdrawing the previous one, if the marks obtained in improvement are 
higher than the marks awarded earlier. When there is no improvement, there shall not 
be any change in the original marks already awarded. The improved marks shall be 
considered for classification but not for ranking. 
Provision for Re-totalling and Revaluation of valued answer scripts 
 UG candidates may apply for re-totalling / revaluation of valued answer 
scripts, to the Controller of Examinations through the Heads of Departments 
and Principal / Dean, in the prescribed forms, remitting the prescribed fee 
within 7 days from the date of publication of results. Revaluation of answer 
scripts is permissible only for the current semester papers and not for any 
arrear paper. 
 Those wish to apply for revaluation of final semester papers can do so within 
five days from the date of publication of results. In re-valuation, the answer 
papers will be valued by an external examiner and if there is a difference of 15 
marks between the two evaluations then the script will be sent for third 
valuation which is final and the mark awarded by the third examiner   will be 
taken into the account. 
 Revised mark statement will be issued after withdrawing the previous one, if 
the marks obtained in revaluation / retotalling are higher than the marks 
obtained earlier. In other cases, the original marks obtained earlier will be 
retained and the matter will be intimated to the student concerned as ‘No 
change’. 
 A candidate who applies for revaluation should not apply for retotalling. 
 
Restrictions to appear for the examinations 
Candidates who fail in any of the papers in the UG End semester examinations shall complete 
the paper concerned within N+2 years from the date of admission to the particular course. If 
they fail to do so, they shall re-register their names and take the examination in the 
texts/revised regulations/syllabus of the paper prescribed for the subsequent batch of 
candidates, in force at the time of their reappearance.  In the event of removal of that paper 
consequent to change of regulation and/or curriculum after N+2 years period, the candidate 
shall have to take up an equivalent paper in the revised syllabus as suggested by the 
Chairman, Board of Studies concerned. 
 
12. BETTERMENTOFGRADES 
A student who has secured only a Pass or Second class and desiresto improve his/her Class 
can appear for Betterment 
ExaminationsonlyinTheorycoursesofanySemesterofhis/herchoice,conductedinSummerVacational
ongwiththeSpecialExaminations.Betterment of Grades is permitted ‘only once’ immediately 
aftercompletionoftheprogramofstudy. 
13. DETENTION AND RE-ADMISSION 
If a student fails to meet the minimum attendance requirement or minimum standards for 
academic progression, the concerned academic head will recommend for detention and it will 
be notified by the concerned Dean of the School. The students who are detained in the current 
semester will not be allowed to register for the next semester and they have to repeat the same 
semester.   
The candidates who are detained or availed academic break or suspended in the previous 
semester/academic year and want to continue their study shall apply for re-admission to the 
university. The candidates shall request for re-admission to the respective Head of the 
Department, with details viz., Full Name, Registration Number, Department, School, Fee 
payment particulars with proofs and reasons for discontinuations.The concerned academic 
head will forward it to the Registrar with specific comments. The Registrar will notify the 
decision of re-admission which shall include the prescribed fee particulars, semester/ year into 
which readmission is granted and additional courses to be completed by the student (if any). 
The candidates should apply for re-admission in advance, that is before the commencement of 
the semester.   
 
14. GROOMING AND ATTIRE FOR STUDENTS  
Grooming and Etiquette is of great significance in the dynamic of shaping one’s Personality. 
The Apollo University stands by a Code of Grooming, Attire and Etiquette that promotes a 
professional standard: Academic Day; Campus Placements and Non-Academic Hours on 
Campus. 
The Dress Code to be in compliance on academic premises while attending: Formal Functions 
of the Institution / Lectures / Practicals / Dining Area / Library / Labs / Office Areas. 
Students shall follow appropriate attire during Academic and Non-Academic hours on  the 
campus. Students shall wear clean, neat, pressed and presentable clothing, and command 
respect by dressing in accordance with responsible personal norms. Students shall always 
wear The Apollo University ID Card with the Lanyard. 
 
 Grooming and Formal Wear - Boys: 
Formal Shirts / T-Shirts with a Collar should preferably be tucked in with a Formal pair of 
Pants Shoes and Socks to complete the Formal Attire. Personal Hygiene should be followed 
and Hair should be well groomed. 
Smart Casuals for Boys: 
Long Kurtas / Formals / Semi-Formal Shirts with Jeans. 
Grooming and Formal Wear - Girls: Sarees / Salwar Suits / Leggings or Jeggings with Long 
Kurtis / Long Frocks / Long Skirts / Palazzos. Complement the outfit with proper footwear. 
Personal Hygiene should be followed and Hair should be well groomed. 
Smart Casuals for Girls: 
Jeans with long Kurtis / Long Skirts / Long Frocks. 
Attire for Non-Academic Hours On Campus: 
The students should be neatly attired during Non-Academic Hours on Campus. 
Dress Code for Boys: 
Jeans / Track Suits / T-Shirts / Trousers / Shirts. 
Dress Code for Girls: 
Jeans / T-Shirts or Blouses / Salwar Suits / Palazzos / Leggings or Jeggings with Long Tops / 
Sarees / Long Skirts / Track Suits. 
DO’S AND DO’NTS FOR BOYS AND GIRL STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY: 
 To wear modest clothing that reflects the essence of good personal grooming 
standards. 
 To refrain from wearing Sleeveless Clothing; Shorts; Short Tops, etc., 
 
PLEASE NOTE:The decision as to what constitutes Appropriate Attire vests with the 
Authorities of The Apollo University. 
 
15. ELIGIBILITY FOR AWARD OF THE DEGREE 
The undergraduate degree will be of 4-years of duration. A student shall be declared as 
eligible for the award of the degree if the candidate has successfully secured the minimum 
number of required credits asspecified in the curriculum corresponding to the 
branchofhis/herstudywithinthestipulatedtime. 
After successful completion of the program, a provisional certificate cum memorandum of 
grades (PCMG) will be issued to the students. The PCMG includes the secured grades and 
class achieved in chosen program and specialization if any, along with grades and CGPA 
secured by the student. The original degree will be presented in the subsequent convocation.  
 
16. DISCRETION POWER  
Not with-standing anything contained in the above sections, theVice Chancellor may review 
all exceptional cases, and give hisdecision,whichwillbefinalandbinding. 
 
ANNEXURE 1 
 
   ELIGIBILTY FOR QUALIFYING EXAM FOR UNDER GRADUATE PROGRAMS 
 
Program 
Type Program Name Eligibility 
Bachelor's Physiotherapy 
Candidates must secure 50% in Physics, Chemistry 
Botany and Zoology  of Intermediate or in the vocational 
physiotherapy or must have appeared for Class 12 or 
equivalent examination with Physics, Chemistry, and 
Botany and Zoology  as major subjects from any 
recognized board. Candidates should attain 17 Years as 
on 31st December of the preceding calendar year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 2 
PROGRAMS OFFERED BY SCHOOL OF TECHNOLOGY 
FROM ACADEMIC YEAR 2023-24 
Sl. 
No. Program Expanded Level 
Minimum Duration 
in Years (N) 
1 BPT Bachelor of Physiotherapy Bachelor’s 41/2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I - Semester 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P - UC-1CommunicativeEnglish 
(UniversityCore) 
3 - - 3 3 - UniversityElective- I 3 - - 3 3 
BPTT1501 Psychology&Sociology 6 - - 6 6 
BPTT1502 Anatomy-I 4 - - 4 4 
BPTT1503 Physiology-I 3 - - 3 3 
BPTL1502 Anatomy-I - - 6 2 6 
BPTL1503 Physiology-I - - 3 1 3 
BPT Ment-01 Physio Mentoring - - - - 1 
BPT Seminar
01 
Physio -Seminars/CBS - - - - 1 
BPT -Lib-01 Physio-Library - - - - 2 -- PhysicalActivity - - - - 2 -- Extra-curricularactivities - - - - 2 -- Co-curricularactivity - - - - 1 
BPT-Self-01 Physio Self-Learning  - - - 1 
TOTAL 17 - 9 20 36 
 
 
 
II– Semester 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P - UC-II 3 - - 3 3 - UE- II 3 - - 3 3 
BPTT1504 Anatomy-II 4 - - 4 4 
BPTT1505 Physiology-II 3 - - 3 3 
BPTT1506 Biochemistry 3 - - 3 3 
BPTL1504 Anatomy-II - - 6 2 6 
BPTTL505 Physiology-II - - 3 1 3 -- Mentoring - - - - 1 -- Seminars/CBS - - - - 2 -- Library - - - - 1 -- PhysicalActivity - - - - 2 -- Extra-curricularactivities - - - - 2 -- Co-curricularactivity - - - - 1 -- Self-Learning - - - - 2 
TOTAL 16 0 9 19 36 
 
 
 
 
III - Semester 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P -  UC-3 3 - - 3 3 -  University Elective -III 3 - - 3 3 
BPTT2501 Exercise therapy-I 3 - - 3 3 
BPTT2502  Biomechanics 4 - - 4 4 
BPTT2503  Low and Medium frequency 3  - 
 - 
 
3 
 
3 
BPTL2501  Exercise therapy-I - - 4 2 4 
BPTL2502  Biomechanics - - 4 2 4 
BPTL2503  Low and Medium frequency -  - 
 
4 
 
2 
 
4 --  Mentoring - - - - 1 --  Seminars/CBS - - - - 1 --  Library - - - - 1 -- Physical Activity - - - - 2 -- Extra-curricular activities - - - - 1 -- Co-curricular activity - - - - 1 -- Self-Learning  - - - 1 
TOTAL 16 - 12 22 36 
 
 
IV - Semester 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
BPTT2504 Pathology 2 - - 2 2 
BPTT2505 Microbiology 2 - - 2 2 
BPTT2506 Exercise therapy-II 3 - - 3 3 
BPTT2507 High frequency 3 - - 3 3 
BPTL2506 Exercise therapy-II - - 4 2 4 
BPTL2507 High frequency - - 4 2 4 
BPTC2501 CLINICALTRAINING - - 12 6 12 -- Mentoring - - - - 1 -- Seminars/ CBS - - - - 1 -- Library - - - - 1 -- Physical Activity - - - - 2 -- Extra-curricular activities - - - - 1 
TOTAL 10 - 20 20 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V - Semester 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
BPTT3501 Pediatrics & General
 Medicine &Pharmacology 
4 - - 4 4 
BPTT3502 General 
surgery/OBG 
2 - - 2 2 
 
BPTT3503 
 
Clinical Orthopaedic conditions
 for Physiotherapists 
 
3 
 - 
 - 
 
3 
3 
BPTT3504 Physiotherapy forOrthopaedic conditions 4 - - 4 4 
BPTT3505 Physical function and diagnosis  3 - - 3 3 
BPTL3504 Physiotherapy for Orthopaedic conditions - - 9 4.5 9 
BPTC3501 Clinical training - - 6 3 6 -- Seminars/ CBS - - - - 1 -- Physical Activity - - - - 2 -- Extra-curricular activities - - - - 1 -- Co-curricular activity - - - - 1 
TOTAL 16 - 15 23.5 36 
 
 
 
 
 
VI - Semester 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
BPTT3506 Clinical Neurology for 
physiotherapists 
3 - - 3 3 
BPTT3507 Physiotherapy in Neurological conditions 4 - - 4 4 
BPTT3508 Women’s Health 3 - - 3 3 
BPTT3509 Community medicine 3 - - 3 3 
BPTL3509 Physiotherapy in Neurological conditions - - 9 4.5 9 
BPTC3502 Clinical training - - 9 4.5 9 -- Seminars/ CBS - - - - 1 -- Physical Activity - - - - 2 -- Extra-curricular activities - - - - 1 -- Co-curricular activity - - - - 1 
TOTAL 13 - 18 22 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VII - Semester 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
BPTT4501 Biostatistics & Research methodology 3 - - 3 3 
BPTT4502 Clinical Cardio Respiratory conditions for 
physiotherapists 
 
3 - - 3 3 
BPTT4503 Physiotherapy for Cardio Respiratory 
conditions 
4 - - 4 4 
BPTT4601 PE-I 3 - - 3 3 
BPTL4503 Physiotherapy for Cardio Respiratory 
conditions - - 6 3 6 
BPTC4501 Clinical training - - 12 6 12 -- Seminars/ CBS - - - - 2 -- Physical Activity - - - - 2 -- Extra-curricular activities - - - - 1 
TOTAL 13 - 18 22 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIII - Semester 
 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
BPTT4504 Rehabilitation Medicine 4 - - 4 4 
BPTT4602 PE-II 3 - - 3 3 
BPTL4504 Rehabilitation Medicine - - 9 4.5 9 
BPTL4501 Project study - - 6 3 6 
BPTC4502 Clinical training - - 9 4.5 9 -- Seminars/ CBS - - - - 1 -- Physical Activity - - - - 2 -- Extra-curricular activities - - - - 1 -- Co-curricular activity - - - - 1 
TOTAL 07 - 24 19 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IX SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNSHIP 
S.N
O 
    Department PERIODOF 
POSTINGS 
No.Of 
working  
hours/day 
No.Of 
working  
hours/day 
Credits 
 1  Physiotherapy 25 Days/Month 8 hours/day       200           6 
 2  Orthopedics 25 Days/Month 8 hours/day       200           6 
 3 GeneralMedicine 25 Days/Month 8 hours/day       200           6 
4 Community 
Based 
Rehabilitation 
 
25 Days/Month 
 
8 hours/day 
 
      200      
 
     6 
  5  OBG 10Days/ Month 8 hours/day        80           3 
6 Pediatrics 15Days/ Month 8 hours/day 120      4 
7 GS 10Days/ Month 8 hours/day        80           3 
 8 ICU  
15Days /Month 
 
8 hours/day 
 
      120      
 
     4 
Total No. Of hours  1200      40 
PE–I PE-II 
 
 
 
1. Hand rehabilitation 
2. Emergency care and BLS 
 
 
 
1. Strength and conditioning 
2. Spinal manipulations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
TAUT1101                        COMMUNICATIVE ENGLISH                                  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3 0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The creation of the Course is to facilitate Stakeholders in productively using the Language to 
functional advantage to form meaningful engagements in a social context and influence their 
professional dynamic. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To expand and enhance vocabulary systematically for clear communication, richer 
expression, and deeper comprehension across various contexts." 
2. To provide the grammatical knowledge and skills necessary to communicate effectively 
in English, both orally and in writing. 
3. To strengthen their ability to write academic papers, essays and summaries using the 
“Mind Mapping,’ dynamic. 
4. To enhance communication skills by analyse, evaluate, and express their opinions on 
various topics, fostering the development of critical thinking abilities 
5. To develop proficiency in listening, speaking, reading and writing, enabling individuals 
to communicate effectively in various real-life situations. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Vocabulary and Reading: Special Features of English Vocabulary, Reading With Purpose; 
Understanding What is Read; Drawing a Conclusion Based on Inferences, Deduction, 
Reading Between the Lines, Context, Connotation, Higher Order Thinking; How to Explain 
Specific Information with Clarity; Defining and Giving Reasons; Giving Directions; 
Professional Vocabulary.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Basic Grammar: Subject-Verb Agreement; Verb Tenses; Active-Passive Voice; Direct and 
Indirect Speech; Question Tags; Degrees of Comparison; Articles; Avoiding Jargon. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Writing: Letter Writing; Report Writing; E-Communication, Drafting and Collating Key 
Information, Taking Notes from Lectures, Reading Materials, Reporting on Minutes of the 
Meeting, Precis Writing 
  
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Basics of Communication: Role of Communication; Purpose of Communication; Barriers to 
Communication; Verbal and Non-Verbal Communication, Communication at the Workplace; 
Human Needs and Communication; “Mind Mapping” Communication; E-Communication. 
  
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Presentations: Self-Introduction; Individual Presentation; Group Discussions; Debates. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to: 
1. To review grammatical structures of English and the use of these forms in specific 
communicative contexts, which include: class activities, homework assignments, 
reading of texts and writing and functional real-world facets. 
2. To improve their accuracy and fluency in producing and understanding spoken and 
written English and endorse this proficiency in both personal and professional realms. 
3. To attain and enhance competence in the four modes of literacy: Writing, Speaking, 
Reading and Listening. 
4. To develop their ability as critical thinkers. 
5. To empower the individuals to connect, engage, and thrive in diverse personal and 
professional environments. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Meenakshi Raman and Sangeeta Sharma, “Technical Communication: Principles and 
Practice”, 3rd Edition, Oxford University Press, 2015. 
2. M. Ashraf Rizvi, “Effective Technical Communication”, Second Edition, McGraw. Hill 
Education, 2017. 
3. Wilfred Funk and Norman Lewis, “30 Days to a More Powerful Vocabulary”, Latest Edition, 
Pocket Books, 2021. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Grant Taylor, “English Conversation Practice”, Tata McGraw-Hill Education India, 2016. 
2. Gary Blake and Robert W. Bly, “The Elements of Technical Writing”, 2nd Edition, 2000, 
Longman. 
3. Raymond Murphy, “English Grammar in Use”, Fourth Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201A                               BASICS OF PHYSIOTHERAPY  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to aim at imparting a basic level health program. This program is 
formulated to enable student to gain adequate knowledge, skills and leading to an ability to 
identify the basics of early features of the health issues 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. Gather and interpret information within a holistic framework pertaining to health. 
2. The overall content of the curriculum focuses on health care and clinical education 
experiences for each student 
3. Understand the basic fundamentals of physiotherapy 
4. Familiarizes participants with different procedures and techniques used in physiotherapy 
and their practical application across various conditions 
5. Provide participants with a substantial understanding of physiotherapy and promote safe 
practices and ethical behaviour in physiotherapy practice. 
 
UNIT-I Basics of Physiotherapy5 Hrs 
i. What is Physiotherapy? 
ii. Types of Physiotherapy 
iii. Benefits of Physiotherapy 
iv. Why is Physiotherapy done? 
UNIT-II Women’s Health                                                                                              5 Hrs 
i. Pre natal exercises & Care 
ii. Post Natal exercises  
 
UNIT-III Acute injuries & managementand the uses of Orthotics & Prosthetics10 Hrs 
i .Mechanism of injury 
ii. Acute muscle injuries 
     -Muscle strain 
     -Risks of muscle strain 
     -Muscle imbalance:  
     -Muscle inflexibility: 
iii.   Ligament sprain and difference between sprain and strain 
iv. Orthotics & Prosthetics                                            
UNIT-IV Ergonomics  & Health and  Aerobics                      13 Hrs 
i. work-related musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs). 
ii. Risk factors associated with work-related MSDs & Possible Causes 
iii. Common ergonomic symptoms  
iv. Different types of Ergonomics & principles of ergonomicsand v. Ergonomic Control  
Methods 
v. Awkward body postures – hazards 
vi. Physical Activity and exercise  
vii. Physical Fitness and Maximum Oxygen Consumption 
viii. Aerobic Exercise Training and Physiological Response to Aerobic Exercise 
ix. Cardiovascular Response to Exercise and Respiratory Response to Exercise  
x. Responses Providing Additional Oxygen to Muscle and Exercise Program  
xi. Warm-Up Period,Aerobic Exercise Period and Cool-Down Period Application 
 
UNIT-V Education & Awareness about common diseases and BLS12 Hrs 
i. Bell’s palsy 
ii. Diabetes 
iii. Coronary artery heart disease 
iv. OA Knee 
v. Stroke 
vi. LBA  
vii. Early identification of congenital anomalies  
viii. BLS Theory 
ix. BLS Practical’s 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Gain the basic knowledge of Physiotherapy 
2. Familiarize the procedures and techniques used in physiotherapy 
3. Protect   and manage from the sport injuries  
4. Gain Knowledgeabout Ergonomics  
5. To maintain physical fitness 
Text Books: 
1. Physiotherapy In Obstetrics And Gynecology-Polden And Mantle,Jaypee Brothers 
2. Women’s Health- Ruth Sapsford,Lippincott,1998 
3. Textbook of orthopedics medicine Vol I & II by James Cyriax – Bailliere 
4. Susan B O'Sullivan, Physical Rehabilitation 6th Edition, 6 edition F A Davis; 2013. 
ISBN-13: 978-0803625792 
5. Arias” Practical Guide To High Risk Pregnancy And Delivery By Amarnath 
Bhide,SabaratnamArulkumaran 
Reference Books: 
1. John Ebenezer- Essentials of Orthopedics for Physiotherapists- 3rd  edition 2016 
2. Davidson’s principles and practice of  medicine 
3. Fundamentals of Ergonomics in Theory and Practice- Alan Hedge- 2019 
4. Introduction to Ergonomics, Third Edition" -Robert Bridger- 2018 
5. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Practice: Improving System Performance and 
Human Well-Being"- Steven Shorrock, Claire Williams- 2020 
6. Acute Care Handbook for Physical Therapists- Jaime C. Paz, Michele P. West- 2019 
7. Sports Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation: Integrating Medicine and Science for 
Performance Solutions" David Joyce, Daniel Lewindon- 2015 
8. Orthotic Intervention for the Hand and Upper Extremity: Splinting Principles and 
Process"- Marylyn A. Jacobs, Noelle M. Austin- 2013 
9. Prosthetics and Orthotics: Lower Limb and Spine"- Joan E. Edelstein, Alex Moroz- 
2017 
10. "Essentials of Physiotherapy”- Prakash Narain Tandon- 2016 
11. Pathology for the Physical Therapist Assistant - Catherine C. Goodman, Kenda S. 
Fuller- 2020 (3rd Edition) 
TAUT1201B                                     BIOSTATICS    L T P C 
                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
Biostatistics is the application of statistical methods to biological and health-related fields. 
This course provides a comprehensive introduction to the principles and techniques of 
biostatistics essential for conducting research in medicine, public health, and biology. 
Students will learn how to effectively collect, analyze, and interpret data from biological and 
health sciences, with a focus on understanding and addressing key issues such as 
experimental design, sampling methods, data visualization, hypothesis testing, and regression 
analysis. 
 
CourseObjectives: 
1. Gain a solid understanding of biostatistical principles including descriptive statistics, 
probability, hypothesis testing, and regression analysis. 
2. Apply these principles to analyze data from biological and health sciences, focusing on 
experimental and observational studies. 
3. Critically interpret statistical results and effectively communicate findings to different 
audiences. 
4. Develop proficiency in using statistical software for data manipulation, analysis, and 
visualization. 
5. Design studies, evaluate literature, and collaborate in interdisciplinary teams, preparing 
for advanced study and research in biostatistics and related fields. 
 
UNIT-I Descriptivemethods    9Hrs 
FrequencyDistribution,CharacteristicsofaFrequencyDistribution,TabularandGraphical 
PresentationofData: LineGraphs, BarCharts,Histograms,Ogives. 
 
UNIT-II Measuresofcentral tendency      9Hrs 
ArithmeticMean,Median,Mode,PositionofAverages,SelectionoftheAppropriateMeasureof 
CentralTendency,GeometricMean, HarmonicMean. 
 
UNIT-III Measuresofdispersion    9Hrs 
Range,InterquartileRange,MeanDeviation,VarianceandStandardDeviation 
 
UNIT-IV SamplingDesigns     9Hrs 
Samplingand SampleDesigns, SignificanceofProbabilityand Non-probabilitysampling 
methods,CrossoverDesign,CaseControlDesign,CohortStudyDesign,Designingclinicaltrials‐Si
ngle‐and Double‐BlindExperiments. 
 
UNIT-V Dataanalysisand interpretation     9Hrs 
Tests of hypothesis, Tests of significance, chi‐squaretest,Goodnessoffit,Analysisofvariance. 
 
CourseOutcomes: 
1. Abilitytodesignexperiments,samplingvariables,analyzethebiologicaldata,interpretandp
resenttheresults in meaningful way. 
2. Createtablesandgraphsfordatapresentation 
3. Describemeasuresofcentraltendencyanddispersionalongwithcalculatingprobabilityfeat
uresof experiments. 
4. Discussthecorrelationbetweenvarioustypesof dataalongwithassociatedvariables. 
5. Testhypothesisand carryoutrelatedstatisticaltests 
 
TextBooks: 
1. DanielWW,CrossCL(2013)Biostatistics: AFoundationSciences 
2. Biostatistics: A Foundation for Analysis in the Health Sciences, 11th EditionChad L. 
Cross, Wayne W. Daniel , ISBN: 978-1-119-49657-1, December 2018 
 
ReferenceBooks 
1. ForthoferRN, LeeES,Hernandez M(2006)ToDesign,Analysis,andDiscovery.Elsevier 
Ltd.,Amsterdam. 
2. Principles of Biostatistics, 3rd Edition, By Marcello Pagano, Kimberlee Gauvreau, 
Heather Mattie (2022). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201C                                  CONSTITUTION OF INDIA        L T P C 
                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Constitution of India course provides a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental 
principles, structure, and functioning of the Indian Constitution. This course examines the 
historical evolution, key features, and various interpretations of the Constitution, highlighting 
its significance in shaping India's legal and political landscape. Through this course, students 
will gain insights into the roles and responsibilities of different branches of government, 
fundamental rights and duties of citizens, and the constitutional mechanisms that ensure the 
democratic functioning of the nation. 
 
CourseObjectives: 
1 TorealizethesignificanceofconstitutionofIndiatostudentsfromallwalksoflifeandhelpthemt
ounderstandthebasicconceptsofIndianconstitution. 
2 Toidentifytheimportance offundamental rightsaswellasfundamental duties. 
3 TounderstandthefunctioningofUnion,StateandLocalGovernmentsinIndianfederalsystem
. 
4 Tolearnprocedureandeffectsofemergency,compositionandactivitiesofelectioncommissi
onandamendmentprocedure. 
5 To acquire knowledge to appear for competitive examinations. 
 
UNIT-I                  9 Hrs 
Historical Background – Constituent Assembly of India – Philosophical Foundations of The 
Indian Constitution – Preamble – Constitutional amendments 
 
UNIT-II                    9 Hrs  
Fundamental Rights – Directive Principles of State Policy – Fundamental Duties – 
Citizenship – Constitutional Remedies for Citizens;  
 
UNIT-III           9 Hrs 
Union Government – Structures of the Union Government and Functions – President – Vice 
President – Prime Minister – Cabinet – Parliament – Supreme Court of India – Judicial 
Review. 
 
UNIT-IV            9 Hrs 
State Government – Structure and Functions – Governor – Chief Minister – Cabinet – State 
Legislature – Judicial System in States – High Courts and other Subordinate Courts. 
 
UNIT-V                       9 Hrs 
Statutory Institutions -Elections-Election Commission of India, National Human Rights 
Commission, National Commission for Women; Local Self Government; Lok pal. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course the student should be able to: 
1. Understand and explain the significance of Indian Constitution as the fundamental law of the 
land. 
2. Exercise his fundamental rights in proper sense at the sametime identifies his responsibilities in 
national building. 
3. Analyze the Indian political system, the powers and functions of the Union,State and Local 
Governments in detail 
4. Understand Electoral Process, Emergency provisions and Amendment procedure. 
5. Take part in competitive examinations with confidence. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Durga Das Basu, “Introduction to the Constitution of India “, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi. 
2. R.C.Agarwal, (1997) “Indian Political System”, S.Chand and Company, New Delhi. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Sharma, Brij Kishore, “Introduction to the Constitution of India”, Prentice Hall of India, New 
Delhi. 
2. The Constitution of India (2022) 
:https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s380537a945c7aaa788ccfcdf1b99b5d8f/uploads/2023/05/202
3050195.pdf 
3. Refer the website through the link given for Constitution of India in various Indian 
Languageshttps://legislative.gov.in/constitution-of-india/ 
4. Indian Constitution at Work by National Council of Educational Research and Training, Sri 
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201D                                   ETHICAL HACKING  L T P C 
                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course is about to learn ethical hacking and security challenges in computer networking. 
Which addresses the data security issues and types of attacks includes malwares, viruses, 
sniffer and denial of service. It teaches ethical responsibilities, professional integrity and 
making appropriate use of the tools and techniques. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. Know the concepts of hacking, ports and penetration testing 
2. Understand the footprinting types and techniques of scanning 
3. Understand the process of system hacking, trojans and backdoors 
4. Apply the concepts of sniffing, packet analysis & session Hijacking 
5. Learn the ethical issues and responsibilities associated with ethical hacking 
 
UNIT-I          9 Hrs 
Introduction to Hacking: Hacking, Types and phases of hacking. Introduction to Ports & 
Protocols: Ports, Protocols, Primary Network Types. Introduction to Penetration Testing: 
Penetration test, Categories and Types of Penetration tests, Structure of Penetration Test 
Report. 
 
UNIT-II          9 Hrs 
Footprinting:Footprinting, Types, Using ping and ns Lookup commands in Windows 
command line. Scanning: Scanning, Basics of Scanning, Basic Techniques of Scanning, 
Enumerating DNS using dnsenum, Performing flag scan using hping3. 
UNIT-III           10 Hrs 
Issues Hacking into System: System Hacking, Password Cracking, Default password 
databases, Manual and Automated Password Cracking, Process of System Hacking, Using 
Keyloggers. Trojans & Backdoors: Trojans, Working of Trojan, Infection Techniques, 
Attack, Lifecycle and Classification of Virus, Worms, Virus Construction Kit. 
UNIT-IV          9 Hrs 
Types, Sniffing, Packet Analysis & Session Hijacking: Sniffing, Packet Analysis, Types of 
Sniffing, Active and Passive Sniffing Techniques, Session Hijacking. Cryptography: 
Cryptography, Digital Signature, Hash Functions. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                8 Hrs 
An introduction to the particular legal, professional and ethical issues likely to face the 
domain of ethical hacking. Ethical responsibilities, professional integrity and making 
appropriate use of the tools and techniques associated with ethical hacking. 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to 
1. Explain the concepts related to hacking, ports and protocols, penetration testing 
2. Determine the applicable footprinting techniques and scanning methods 
3. Explain the process of system hacking and explain the concepts Trojans, backdoors, worms 
and virus and it’s countermeasures 
4. Demonstrate systematic understanding of the concepts of sniffing and cryptography 
5. Understand the legal and professional responsibilities of ethical hacking 
 
Text Books: 
1. Jiawei Hacking: Be a Hacker with Ethics, Harsh Bothra, Khanna Publications, 2019. 
2. Ethical Hacking and Penetration Testing Guide, Rafay Baloch, 2014. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Alex BersonKali Linux Wireless Penetration Testing Beginner's Guide, Vivek 
Ramachandran, Cameron Buchanan, Packt Publishing, 2015. 
2. SQL Injection Attacks and Defense, 1st Edition, Justin Clarke-Salt, Syngress 
Publication. 
3. Mastering Modern Web Penetration Testing, Prakhar Prasad, Packt Publishing, October 
2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201E               FUNDAMENTALS OF COMPUTERS                L T P C 
                                                                                                                           3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to aim at imparting a basic level appreciation program. The incumbent 
can use the computer for basic purposes of preparing his personnel/business letters, viewing 
information on the Internet (the web), sending mail, using internet bankingservices, etc.and 
allows to become digitally literate. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To introduce the fundamental concepts of computers, including their characteristics, 
types, and applications. 
2. To explain the functional components of a computer and various input/output devices. 
3. To understand different types of computer memory and storage devices. 
4. To introduce computer languages and software, including algorithms and programming 
languages and provide an overview of operating systems and basic networking 
concepts. 
5. To introduce the components and practical applications of MS Office. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Introduction to Computer: Computer Characteristics, Concept of Hardware, 
Software,Evolution of computer and Generations, Types of Computers–Analog and Digital 
computers, Hybrid Computers, General Purpose and Special Purpose Computers, Limitations 
of Applications of Computer in Various Fields. 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Structure and Working of Computer: Functional Block Diagram of Computer. CPU, 
ALU, Memory UNIT-, Bus Structure of Digital Computer–Address, Data and Control Bus. 
Input/Output Devices: Input Device– Keyboard, Mouse, Scanner, MICR,OMR. Output 
Devices–VDU, Printers– Dot Matrix, Daisy-wheel, Inkjet, Laser, Line Printers and Plotters. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Computer Memory: Memory Concept, Memory Cell, Memory Organization, 
Semiconductor Memory – RAM, ROM, PROM, EPROM, Secondary Storage Devices – 
Magnetic Tape, Magnetic Disk (Floppy Disk and Hard Disk.), Compact Disk. 
Computer Language and Software: Algorithm, Flowcharts, Machine Language, Assembly 
Language, High Level Language, Assembler, Compiler, Interpreter. Characteristics of Good 
Language. Software – System and Application Software. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Operating System: Operating System, Evolution of Operating System. Functions of 
Operating System. Types of Operating Systems. Detailed Study of Windows Operating 
System. Introduction and Features of LINUXOS. 
Networking: Concept, Basic Elements of a Communication System, Data Transmission 
Media,Topologies, LAN, MAN, WAN, Internet 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
MSOffice: Introduction to MS Office, Components and Features. MSWord: Creating Letter, 
Table, Fonts, Page Layout Document, Formatting, Spell Check, Print Preview, Template, 
Color, Mail Merge, AutoText, Inserting Picture, WordArt. 
MS Excel: Introduction to Excel, Sorting, Queries, Graphs, Scientific Functions. 
PowerPoint: Introduction to PowerPoint, Creation of Slides, Inserting Pictures, Preparing 
Slide Show with Animation. MS Access: Creation and Manipulation of Files. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, student will be able to: 
1. Understand the basic characteristics, types, and applications of computers. 
2. Comprehend the functional components and input/output devices of a computer. 
3. Describe various memory types and secondary storage devices. 
4. Differentiate between machine, assembly, and high-level languages and their associated 
tools. Understand the role and types of operating systems, with knowledge of Windows 
and Linux, and basic networking concepts. 
5. Utilize MS Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Access for practical applications. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Peter Norton: Computing Fundamentals.6th Edition, Mc Graw Hill-Osborne, 2007. 
2. Sarita Dhawale, Thakur Akash Ashok: Fundamentals of Computer, Thakur 
Publication Pvt. Ltd. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Deborah Morley and Charles S.Parker; Fundamentals of Computers; Cengage 
Learning, India edition; 2009. 
2. Alex is Leon and Mathews Leon; Fundamentals of Information Technology; Vikas 
Publication, Chennai. 
3. Francis Scheid; Theory and Problems of Introduction to Computer Science Schaum’s 
Outline Series; Tata Mc Graw Hill publication. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201F                        GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT                L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is important for professionals from the point of creating engendered perspectives 
and sensitivity toward issues concerning women, men, and sexual minorities. It further 
reaffirms the belief in the importance of grassroots experiences and narratives while dealing 
with gender issues. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand key concepts, and issues in gender and development  
2. Understand the social construction of gender and develop gender perspectives 
inanalyzing social realities 
3. Understand how the gender dynamics of power and inequality play out in the social 
institutions of households, markets, and states and within the arena of civil society.  
4. Create awareness about the magnitude of gender disparities in the present context  
5. Examine through the gender lens, the interlinkage between cultural practices social 
processes, and development approaches  
 
UNIT-I Basic Concepts and Theories of Feminism                                                   10 Hrs 
Concepts- gender, gender studies, gender identity, gender role stereotyping, gender division 
of labor, gender discrimination, gender equality, and equity.  Overview of feminist theories – 
Liberal feminism, Radical Feminism, Black feminism, postmodern feminism, Eco‐ feminism; 
The international background to the Women’s Movement, The genesis of the Women’s 
Movement in India. Contemporary Contestations – Intersex and Transgender Movements.  
Feminist thinkers in the 18th, 19th, 20th, and 21st Centuries.  
 
UNIT-II Gender Issues                                                                                                   10 Hrs 
Major gender issues – national and global - causes and consequences., LGBTQIA+ issues 
(Gender violence in private and public spaces: Domestic violence, Dowry, trafficking in 
women and children, rape, sex-selective abortion, female infanticide, female foeticide, child 
marriage, prostitution • Gender, leadership, and workplace; Sexual Harassment at 
Workplace). Gender-based violence, patriarchy, sexism, racism, casteism, economic 
inequality, and misogyny. Gender and health (Physical and mental), reproductive health, and 
sexuality. Feminization of poverty. Issues of the rights of sexual minorities and transgender - 
Article 377 and beyond. 
 
UNIT-III Gender Perspectives in Development                                                            10Hrs 
Gender Analysis Tools: Gender budgeting, Gender mainstreaming, SIG, Gender Parity Index, 
Gender Inequality Index, Human Development Index, Gender Development Index, Gender 
Empowerment Measure, Approaches to development-- Women in Development (WID), 
Women and Development (WAD), Gender and Development(GAD), Millennium 
Development Goals, and Sustainable Development Gender Analysis Frameworks; Gender 
blind; neutral and redistributive policies; Welfare, Efficiency and Empowerment approaches 
to Gender; Strategic and practical gender needs/interests; Case Studies to understand the 
engagement with gender, (Poverty alleviation Forestry; Drinking Water and Sanitation; 
Health programmes, Urban renewal and slum rehabilitation Programmes, and micro-credit 
programmes like SHGs. 
 
 
UNIT-IV Mechanisms Addressing Issues and Best Practices                                    10 Hrs 
Constitutional and legislative safeguards, policies, and programmes  Institutional 
mechanisms: National Commission for Women, Rashtriya MahilaKosh, Crime Against 
Women Cell, Family Court, Family Counselling Centres and Crisis intervention centers Best 
practices to address disparity, violence, and safety issues 
International initiatives world conferences, women’s decade, CEDAW. Indian initiatives – 
Towards Equality Report, National Perspective Plan for women, National Policy for the 
Empowerment of Women-2001, National and State women’s Commissions, Nirbhaya, 
Women Development Corporation; Legal remedies and Social Welfare Services available to 
Women Facing Violence. 
 
UNIT-V Gender and Media                                                                                             5 Hrs 
Discourse on Women and Media Studies- Mainstream Media, Feminist Media.  Coverage of 
Women’s issues, sexual minorities, and issues of women in Mass Media and Media 
Organizations (Audio-Visual and Print media).  Digital Media and legal protection 
(cybercrimes and laws).  Alternative Media – Folk Art, Street Play and Theatre.  Indecent 
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, Pornography, Impact of media on Gender. 
Construction of masculinity and feminity in media.   
 
Course Outcomes:  
By the end of the course, students should be able to:  
1. Understand the concept of gender and the social construction of feminity and masculinity  
2. Develop sensitivity towards the existing practices leading to gender discrimination and 
marginalization in society.  
3. Develop the ability to identify social, economic and political systems that adversely affect 
the well-being and functioning of women. 
4. Suggest affirmative action in planning to promote gender equity, equality, and safety for 
women and sexual minorities  
5. Understand the major theoretical and empirical issues that emerge in the gender field. 
Text Books: 
1. Nalini Visvanathan (Ed.), (2006) The Women, Gender and Development Reader, 
Zubaan, New  Delhi 
2. Kannabiran, Kalpana&Ritu Menon. 2007. From Mathura to Manorma: Resisting 
Violence Against Women, New Delhi: Women Unlimited 
Reference Books: 
1. Seth, M. 2001. Women and Development: The Indian Experience. New Delhi: Sage 
Publications. 
2. Banerjee, N; S. Sen &N. Dhawan. 2011. Mapping the Field: Gender Relations in 
Contemporary India, Volume 1, Kolkata: Stree 
3. Bose, C.E. &Minjeong Kim. 2009. Global Gender Research: Transnational 
Perspectives, New York: Routledge 
Notes 
 
1. https://www.studocu.com/row/document/kohat-university-of-science-and
technology/gender-studies/gender-studies-new-lecture-notes-1-7/5176872 
2. https://teentalk.ca/learn-about/gender
identity/#:~:text=There%20are%20many%20different%20gender,or%20a%20c
ombination%20of%20these. 
3. https://genderspectrum.org/articles/understanding-gender 
 
TAUT1201G                          LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive introduction to the fundamental concepts of 
leadership. Students will gain knowledge of different leadership levels and styles, and 
understand the significance of vision and strategy formulation. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the basic concepts of leadership 
2. Knowledge of leadership development strategy 
3. Knowledge of leadership development approaches 
4. Knowledge of leadership traits 
5. Awareness on self-awareness exercises.  
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs                                                        
Understanding Leadership-Defining Leadership; Leadership styles, Entrepreneurial leaders, 
Different levels of leaders 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Strategy formulation- formulation of vision, Strategy formulation and communication, role 
of the leader in managing change, foundation for effective team development 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Leadership development approaches- Significance of leadership development strategy, 
leadership development approaches- One-to-one coaching, Mentor schemes, Role of HR and 
development, Buddy pairs, Action learning sets, Work-based projects 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Recognizing Leadership Traits-Historical Leaders; Traits Leaders Display, Leadership 
Studies: What Traits Do Effective Leaders Exhibit. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Recognising self - Exercises of Self-awareness using Johari Window, Development diaries, 
Feedback exercises, Personal vision setting 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of leadership 
2. Understand the significance of vision and strategy formulation 
3. Knowledge of leadership development approaches. 
4. Knowledge of leadership traits. 
5. Knowledge of self awareness techniques 
Text Books:  
1. Rosemary Ryan, Leadership Development - A guide for HR and Training professionals, 
ELSEVIER, UK  
2. Kim S. Cameron, Positive Leadership: Strategies for Extraordinary Performance, 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Manuel London,Leadership Development: Paths To Self-insight and Professional 
Growth, Psychology Press, New York. 
2. Susan E. Murphy, Ronald E. Riggio, The Future of Leadership Development, 
Routledge is an imprint of Taylor &Franci 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201H                             MATHEMATICAL THINKING                          L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
Mathematical Thinking is a university elective course that teaches fundamental concepts of 
basic algebraic and mathematical operations. After learning this course, students will easily 
be able to learn more problems solving skills and use this course for practicing. The course 
emphasizes problem-solving skills and analytical thinking, and equips students with the skills 
necessary to tackle real-world problems using basic mathematical and arithmetical concepts. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, the students will be able: 
1. To familiarize the students with the fundamental concepts of basic numbers, 
mathematical operations, and divisibility rules 
2. Summarize the basic concepts mathematical operations on numbers and calculate LCM, 
GCD to solve simple problems. 
3. Compute To probability concepts and statistical methods in various applications 
engineering. 
4. Understand the formula for evaluate thesquare root and cube root of different types 
numbers  
5. Impart the arrangements and selections of things and counting numbers and check for 
independence of events. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        
9 Hrs 
Number system and Tests of Divisibility:Digits, numbers,Indian-Hindu-Arabic system, 
Roman Numbers,Face Value and Place values,Various Types of Numbers or Standard 
Numbers, Prime number, composite numbers,Perfect Numbers,Co-primes (or) Relative 
Primes, Twin primes, perfect numbers, Testing of prime numbers,Mathematical operations on 
even and odd numbers. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
LCM and GCD or HCF: Factors and Multiplers,Highest Common Factor (H.C.F.) or 
Greatest Common Measure (G.C.M.) or Greatest Common Divisor (G.C.D.) factorization 
method, division method, finding the H.C.F. of more than two numbers, factorization method 
of finding L.C.M, H.C.F. and L.C.M. of fractions. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
System Simplifications: BODMAS’ Rule, Modulus of a Real Number, Virnaculum (or Bar), 
Algebraic identities, set theory operations (union, intersection, complements). 
 
 
 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs   
Square Roots, Cube Roots,averages and percentages: Square Root, cube root, Problems 
on numbers, concept of averages, problems on averages, concept of percentage and problems 
on percentages. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Permutations, combinations and Probability:  Fundamental principle with respect of 
addition and multiplication, permutations, combination, relation between permutation and 
combination, Random experiment, sample space and basic problems of events of a 
probability. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to: 
1. To explain fundamental concepts of basic number system, including standard numbers, 
mathematical operations, and divisibility rules. 
2. To apply mathematical operations on numbers and calculate lcm, gcd to solve simple 
problems. 
3. To evaluate the arrangements and selections of things and counting numbers. 
4. To understand the simplications by using identities and apply the different kinds of 
operations on the numbers. 
5. To evaluate square root and cube root of different types numbers and calculate 
appropriate solutions for different problems. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Quantitative Aptitude  Text Book, Dr.RS.Agrrwal. 
2. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book,S.Chandu. 
3. Andhra Pradesh Academy of IPE text books. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book, Quicker Mathematics ,second edition 
2. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book,Abjuirhguwaha,Fourth edition 
3. www.online quantitative aptitude testseries.com 
4. Quantitative Aptitude, GSR Publications,Gunturu,third edition 
5. Quantitative Aptitude, verbal reasoning ,Guptha publication,3rd edition 
6. www.enaduprathibaonline.com  and www.sakshionlineseries.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201I                                                 NURSING    L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This module is designed to help the students to acquire comprehensive knowledge in basic 
concepts of Health, Nursing, Vital signs, Basic Life support, home care management of 
Diabetes & Hypertension and Adolescent health.  
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand the concept of health, illness, and Nursing 
2. Learn the technique of assessing and monitoring vital signs  
3. Perform BLS using evidence based national or international guidelines in the management of 
adult victims with the cardiac arrest. 
4. Understand the concept of home care management of Diabetes and Hypertensive persons  
5. Develop understanding about the normal growth and development, needs and health issues 
of adolescents  
 
UNIT-I            03 Hrs 
Concepts of Health and Nursing: Definition of Health and ill ness,Health-illness 
continuum, Factors influencing Health, Nursing as a profession and Career ladder. 
UNIT-II          12 Hrs 
Vital signs: Temperature:Physiology, regulation, factors affecting body temperature, 
Assessment of body temperature: sites, technique and special considerations. 
Pulse:Physiology & regulation, characteristics of the pulse, factors affecting pulse, 
Assessment of the pulse: sites, location, technique and special considerations. 
Respiration:Physiology and regulation, mechanics of breathing, characteristics of the 
respiration, factors affecting respiration, Assessment of respiration: technique and special 
considerations. 
Blood pressure:Physiology and regulation, characteristics of the blood pressure, factors 
affecting blood pressure.Assessment of blood pressure: sites, equipment and technique and 
special considerations. Recordingof vital signs. 
Pain: Definition, types physiology of pain and factors influencing the pain 
 
UNIT-III           8 Hrs 
Basic life support / basic cardiopulmonary life support(BLS/BCLS) 
Introduction, definition, purposes, indications, contraindications and steps in procedure. 
UNIT-IV          12 Hrs 
Home care management of Diabetes and Hypertension  
Diabetes-Introduction to Diabetes Mellitus –   A National and Global burden: Classification, 
risk factors, pathophysiology, manifestations, screening, diagnostic criteria and 
complications, The treatmentModalities of Diabetes Mellitus: (Life style modifications 
Diet therapy, Exercise, Medical Management, Self-Management, Practical Aspects: Blood 
Glucose monitoring, Diabetic foot care, Exercises, Diabetic Diet Planning, Self-Insulin 
administration) 
Hypertension-Introduction to Hypertension, Types,risk factors ,pathophysiology 
,manifestations, diagnostic criteria and complications, treatment modalities  : life style 
modifications,Diet therapy ,Exercise ,Medical management. 
 
UNIT-V          10 Hrs 
Adolescent Health: Growth and Development of adolescent, Nutritional and developmental 
needs of adolescent, Common health problemsincluding mental healthproblems, 
Reproductive and sexual health issues 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Acquire a thorough knowledge on concept of health and illness. 
2. Demonstrate skills in monitoring the vital signs 
3. Develop skills in performing BLS/BCLS 
4. Able to attain knowledge and skills on treatment modalities of DM 
5. Aware of normal Growth and development and common health problems in adolescent  
 
Text Books: 
1. Potter and perrys, Fundamentals of Nursing,4th edition,Mosby,Elsevier publication  
2. Lewis, textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing 4thsouth  Asian edition, Elsevier publication 
3. Dorothy R. Marlow, Text book of paediatric nursing, sixth edition, Elsevier publications, 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Joyce M black textbook of medical surgical nursing ,8th edition, Elsevier publications, 
2. Kozier and Erbs, textbook of fundamentals of Nursing,Elsevier publications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201J                                     ONE HEALTH                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This course introduces students to the One Health approach, an interdisciplinary approach 
that recognizes the interconnectedness of human, animal and environmental health. Students 
will learn about the history of One Health, its relevance to global health and its role in 
addressing a range of health challenges, including zoonotic diseases, environmental health 
hazards and antimicrobial resistance. The course will also explore current and emerging One 
Health challenges and innovations and the ethical considerations of One Health research and 
practice. 
Course Objectives:  
1. To explain the relevance of One Health to global health. 
2. To understand the interdisciplinary nature of One Health research and practice. 
3. To analyze the impact of environmental health hazards on human and animal health. 
4. To identify emerging One Health challenges and innovations. 
5. To evaluate ethical considerations in One Health research and practice. 
 
UNIT-I                             9 Hrs 
Overview of One Health and its relevance to global health, Definition of One Health and its 
history, Examples of One Health challenges, such as zoonotic diseases and antimicrobial 
resistance, The role of inter-disciplinarity in One Health research and practice, Global One 
Health initiatives and their impact 
 
UNIT-II                                       9 Hrs 
Environmental health and its relationship to One Health, Overview of environmental health 
and its impact on human and animal health, Environmental risks to health, such as pollution 
and climate change, Case studies highlighting the impact of environmental hazards on human 
and animal health, The role of One Health in addressing environmental health challenges 
 
UNIT-III                 9 Hrs 
Zoonotic diseases and One Health, Overview of zoonotic diseases and their impact on human 
and animal health, The ecology of zoonotic diseases and how they emerge and spread, Case 
studies of major zoonotic disease outbreaks, such as Ebola and COVID-19, The One Health 
approach to preventing and controlling zoonotic diseases. 
 
UNIT-IV                 9 Hrs 
Antimicrobial resistance and One Health, Overview of antimicrobial resistance and its impact 
on human and animal health, the relationship between antimicrobial use in animal agriculture 
and human health, the role of One Health in addressing the global challenge of antimicrobial 
resistance, Case studies of One Health approaches to controlling antimicrobial resistance, 
such as the WHO Global Action Plan 
UNIT-V                 9 Hrs 
Future directions in One Health research and practice, Emerging One Health challenges-food 
security and emerging infectious diseases, Innovations in One Health research and practice, 
such as digital technologies and genomics, Opportunities for One Health collaboration across 
sectors and disciplines, Ethical considerations in One Health research and practice.  
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Describe the One Health approach and its relevance to global health 
2. Analyze the impact of environmental health hazards on human and animal health 
3. Evaluate the role of One Health in addressing zoonotic diseases and controlling antimicrobial 
resistance 
4. Identify emerging One Health challenges and innovations 
5. Discuss ethical considerations in One Health research and practice 
Text Books: 
1. One Health: People, Animals and the Environment by Ronald M. Atlas and Stanley Maloy 
2. One Health: The Human-Animal-Environment Interfaces in Emerging Infectious Diseases by 
John S. Mackenzie and Martyn Jeggo 
 
Reference Books: 
1. One Health: The Theory and Practice of Integrated Health Approaches edited by Jakob 
Zinsstag, Esther Schelling, David Waltner-Toews and Maxine Whittaker 
2. One Health and the Politics of Antimicrobial Resistance edited by Laura H. Kahn, Bruce 
Kaplan and Thomas P. Monath 
3. The One Health Initiative: A Global Movement to Achieve Sustainable Health and Well-being 
edited by Bruce Kaplan and Thomas P. Monath. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201K  BASIC EMERGENCY CAREAND LIFE SUPPORT SKILLS    L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This course introduces students to the fundamental skills required for providing basic 
emergency care and life support. It covers essential techniques in CPR, AED use, and basic 
first aid to prepare students for real-life emergency situations. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. To understand the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. To acquire essential first aid skills. 
3. To know the use of AED 
4. To get trained in the practical aspects of CPR. 
5. To know the various assessment aspects of a patient in an emergency 
 
UNIT-IBasic Life Support (BLS) and CPR                                                                   9 Hrs 
Introduction to BLS and CPR, Steps of Adult, Child, and Infant CPR, Airway Management, 
Rescue Breathing and Chest Compressions 
 
UNIT-IIAutomated External Defibrillator (AED)                                                        9 Hrs 
What is an AED?When and How to Use an AED, Safety Precautions, Different types of 
Defibrillators 
 
UNIT-IIIBasic First Aid Techniques                                                                              9 Hrs 
Principles of First Aid, Managing Bleeding and Wounds, Fractures and Sprains, Burns and 
Scalds. 
  
UNIT-IVRecognizing Medical Emergencies                                                                  9 Hrs 
Identifying Common Medical Emergencies, Initial Assessment and Response, Managing 
Breathing and Cardiac Emergencies. 
 
UNIT-VPractical Skills Practice                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Hands-on CPR Practice, AED Operation Drills, First Aid Skills Practice, Scenario-Based 
Training 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Acquire a thorough knowledge of the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. Apply essential first aid skills. 
3. Demonstrate the use of AED in Emergencies. 
4. Demonstrate the practical aspects of CPR 
5. Evaluate various assessment plans by the specific emergency. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Basic Life Support Provider Manual" by American Heart Association Pang, Ning Tan, Michael 
Steinbach and Vipin Kumar “Introduction to Data Mining”,  Pearson Education, 2007. 
2. "First Aid Manual" by St. John Ambulance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201L                       BASICS OF HEALTH MANAGEMENT                 L T P C 
                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides an essential foundation in health management, focusing on key areas 
such as basic life support, first aid, stroke management, and the prevention and management 
of both communicable and non-communicable diseases. Students will develop practical skills 
and knowledge to effectively manage health-related situations in various settings. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. To understand the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. To acquire essential first aid skills. 
3. To comprehend the causes, symptoms, and management of stroke. 
4. To learn about non-communicable diseases, their risk factors, and management strategies. 
5. To understand communicable diseases, their transmission, prevention, and control. 
 
UNIT-I  Basic Life Support                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Overview of Basic Life Support (BLS), Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) Techniques, 
Use of Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs), Airway Management and Breathing 
Support, BLS Protocols and Procedures 
 
UNIT-II First Aid                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Introduction to First Aid Principles, Managing Wounds and Bleeding, Fractures and 
Musculoskeletal Injuries, Burns and Scalds Treatment, Handling Medical Emergencies (e.g., 
heart attack, choking, seizures) 
 
UNIT-III Stroke                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Understanding Stroke: Types and Causes,Symptoms and Warning Signs of Stroke, 
Immediate Response and Management, Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery, Prevention and 
Risk Reduction Strategies 
  
UNIT-IV Non-Communicable Diseases                                                                     9 Hrs 
Definition and Classification of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs), Common NCDs: 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Diabetes, Cancer, Chronic Respiratory Diseases, Risk Factors and 
Prevention Strategies, Management and Treatment Approaches, Public Health Implications 
and Policy Responses 
 
UNIT-VCommunicable Diseases                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Introduction to Communicable Diseases, Modes of Transmission and Epidemiology, 
Prevention and Control Measures (e.g., vaccination, hygiene, quarantine), Management of 
Common Communicable Diseases (e.g., TB, HIV/AIDS, Influenza), Emerging Infectious 
Diseases and Global Health Security 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Perform basic life support techniques. 
2. Administer essential first aid. 
3. Recognize and manage stroke symptoms and treatments. 
4. Understand and address non-communicable diseases. 
5. Implement communicable disease control measures. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Basic Life Support Provider Manual" by American Heart Association 
2.  "First Aid Manual" by St. John Ambulance, St. Andrew's First Aid, and the British 
Red Cross 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Stroke: Practical Guide to Management" by Charles P. Warlow 
2.  "Non-Communicable Diseases in the Developing World" by Rachel Nugent 
3.  "Communicable Disease Control and Health Protection Handbook" by Jeremy 
Hawker et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201N                                      ENTREPRENEURSHIP                                  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of entrepreneurship, its applications, and its 
scope. Students will learn to generate broad ideas for starting an enterprise or startup and 
convert them into viable opportunities. The course covers the essentials of managing startups, 
understanding small and medium enterprises, and gaining knowledge of various financial 
institutions. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the concept of Entrepreneurship, its applications and scope. 
2. Application of knowledge for generating a broad idea for a starting an enterprise/start 
up and converting to opportunity. 
3. Knowledge of managing the start-up's 
4. Understand the small and medium enterprises 
5. Knowledge of different financial institutions 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship: Definition and Concept of entrepreneurship - Entrepreneur 
Characteristics – Classification of Entrepreneurs –Role of Entrepreneurship in Economic 
Development 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Idea to Opportunity- Introduction, Sources of New Ideas, Techniques for Generating Ideas, 
Assessing Business Potential of an Idea, Opportunity Recognition, Sources and process, 
Indian Economy—Opportunities, Steps Involved in Tapping Opportunity 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship Development - Intrapreneurship, Entrepreneurship as a Career Option, 
Female Entrepreneurship and problems,Types of Start-ups, Start-ups and mistakes, Managing 
Start-ups During Downturn 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship Trends- Small and Medium Business Enterprises, International 
Entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurship—Emerging Trends in the Global Knowledge Economy 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Institutions Supporting and Taxation Benefits: Central level Institutions: NABARD; 
SIDBI,– State Level Institutions –DICs – SFC - Government Policy for MSMEs - Tax 
Incentives and Concessions. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic understanding of entrepreneurship  
2. Knowledge of idea generation and opportunities identification of entrepreneurship  
3. Understand different forms of enterprises 
4. Understand different emerging trends of entrepreneurship 
5. Knowledge of different financial institutions 
Text Books: 
1. Arya Kumar, Entrepreneurship, Pearson, Delhi  
2. Poornima MCH, Entrepreneurship Development –Small Business Enterprises, Pearson, Delhi  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Anil Kumar, S., ET.al., Entrepreneurship Development, New Age International Publishers, 
New Delhi 
2. Khanka, SS, Entrepreneurship Development, S. Chand, New Delhi  
3. Peter F. Drucker,Innovation and Entrepreneurship  
4. A.Sahay, M. S. Chhikara, New Vistas of Entrepreneurship: Challenges 
&Opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201O                         MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS                                   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides a solid foundation in the fundamentals of economics and managerial 
economics. Students will learn to apply concepts of production cost and revenues for 
effective business decisions. The course also covers analyzing capital investments to 
maximize returns, understanding different forms of business organizations, and evaluating 
business organizations and marketing strategies. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understandthe fundamentalsofEconomics and Managerial economics 
2. ApplytheConceptofProduction costandrevenuesforeffectiveBusinessdecision 
3. Analyzehowtoinvest theircapitalandmaximizereturns. 
4. Understand different forms of business organizations 
5. EvaluateBusiness organizations and marketing strategies 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Introduction:Meaning, Nature, Significance, Functions, and Advantages, ME and its role in 
other fields. Demand - Concept, Function,LawofDemand-DemandElasticity-Types
Measurement.DemandForecasting-Factorsgoverning forecasting and methods.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Production:Introduction – Nature, meaning, significance, functions and advantages. 
Production Function– Least-cost combination– Short run and Long run Production Function- 
Isoquants and Isocosts, MRTS -Cobb-DouglasProductionFunction-LawsofReturns 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Cost&Break-EvenAnalysis-CostconceptsandCostbehavior-Break-EvenAnalysis(BEA)
Determination of Break-Even Point (Simple Problems)-Managerial significance and 
limitations ofBreak-EvenAnalysis. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
BusinessOrganizations Introduction
Nature,meaning,significance,functionsandadvantages.FormsofBusinessOrganizations- Sole 
Proprietary - Partnership - Joint Stock Companies - Public Sector Enterprises. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Markets Types of Markets - Perfect and Imperfect Competition - Features of Perfect 
Competition Monopoly-MonopolisticCompetition–Oligopoly-Price-OutputDetermination
PricingMethodsandStrategies. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic understanding of managerial economics  
2. Develop an understanding of the applications of production 
3. Interpret cost analysis 
4. Understand different forms of business organizations. 
5. Analyse the causes and consequences of different market conditions. 
 
Text Books:  
1. Varshney&Maheswari:ManagerialEconomics,SultanChand,2013. 
2. Aryasri:BusinessEconomicsandFinancialAnalysis,4/e,MGH,2019. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. AhujaHlManagerial economicsSchand,3/e,2013 
2. S.A.SiddiquiandA.S.Siddiqui:ManagerialEconomicsandFinancialAnalysis,NewAgeIn
ternational,2013. 
3. JosephG.NellisandDavidParker:PrinciplesofBusinessEconomics,Pearson,2/e,NewDel
hi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201P                              ORGANIC FARMING                                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
By the end of the course, students will be equipped with the knowledge and skills to plan, 
establish, and manage organic farms effectively. This course serves as a foundation for 
aspiring organic farmers, agricultural professionals, and individuals interested in sustainable 
food production and environmental conservation. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To Understand the principles and practices of organic farming. 
2. To Analyze the environmental, economic, and social implications of conventional versus 
organic agricultural systems. 
3. To Apply organic farming techniques to enhance soil health and fertility. 
4. To Examine the certification processes and regulations governing organic farming. 
5. To explore ways to engage with local communities and promote organic practices. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Introduction to Organic Farming, Overview of organic farming principles and practices, 
Historical development and evolution of organic agriculture, Importance of organic farming 
in sustainable agriculture, Comparison between conventional and organic farming systems, 
Certification and regulatory requirements for organic farming. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Soil Health and Management, Importance of soil health in organic farming, Soil composition 
and structure, Soil fertility management without synthetic inputs, Soil conservation 
techniques: cover cropping, crop rotation, mulching, Composting and vermicomposting for 
organic matter enrichment. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Crop Management in Organic Systems, Selection of suitable crops for organic farming, 
Organic seed selection, saving, and sourcing, Crop planning and rotation strategies, Weed 
management without herbicides: mechanical, cultural, and biological control methods, Pest 
and disease management in organic systems: integrated pest management (IPM), biological 
control, and natural remedies. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Organic Livestock Management, Principles of organic livestock production, Organic feed 
sourcing and formulation, Housing and space requirements for organic livestock, Health care 
and disease management without antibiotics and synthetic chemicals, Organic certification 
requirements for livestock operations. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Marketing and Economics of Organic Farming, Market trends and consumer demand for 
organic products, Certification and labeling requirements for organic products, Marketing 
strategies for organic farmers: direct sales, farmers markets, CSA (Community Supported 
Agriculture), Economic viability and profitability of organic farming, Government support 
programs and incentives for organic farmers. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course the student shall be able to, 
1. Demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of the principles of organic farming and their 
application in agricultural systems. 
2. Critically evaluate the sustainability of different agricultural practices, considering 
environmental impact, economic viability, and social equity. 
3. Design and implement an organic farming plan for a specific crop or agricultural enterprise. 
4. Analyze case studies and research articles to assess the effectiveness of organic farming 
practices in various contexts. 
5. Communicate effectively about organic farming principles and practices, both orally and in 
writing. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Teaming with Microbes: The Organic Gardener's Guide to the Soil Food Web" by Jeff 
Lowenfels and Wayne Lewis  
2. "The Organic Farmer's Business Handbook: A Complete Guide to Managing Finances, Crops, 
and Staff - and Making a Profit" by Richard Wiswall 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Introduction to Permaculture" by Bill Mollison  
2. "Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual" by Charles L. Mohler and Sue Ellen 
Johnson  
3. "The Organic Farming Manual: A Comprehensive Guide to Starting and Running a Certified 
Organic Farm" by Anne Larkin Hansen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201Q      PERSONALITY  DEVELOPMENT  L T  P C 
                      3  0  0  3 
Course Description:  
Personality Development is a comprehensive course designed to equip undergraduates with 
the essential skills and knowledge required for personal growth and professional success. The 
course focuses on enhancing self-awareness, emotional intelligence, communication, and 
interpersonal skills. Students will learn how to build confidence, manage stress, and develop 
effective time management strategies. Additionally, the course covers critical aspects of 
professional development, including resume writing, interview techniques, and personal 
branding. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To develop self-awareness and emotional intelligence. 
2. To enhance communication and interpersonal skills. 
3. To build confidence and self-esteem. 
4. To foster professional and personal growth. 
5. To prepare students for successful careers and meaningful personal lives. 
 
UNIT-I Introduction to Personality Development                        9 Hrs 
Definition and importance of personality development; Initial self-assessment and goal 
setting; Short-term and long-term goal setting; Understanding oneself: strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, threats (SWOT analysis); Values, beliefs, and attitudes; Personal vision and 
mission statements; Components of emotional intelligence (EQ); Self-regulation and self
motivation; Empathy and social skills. 
 
UNIT-II Communication Skills and Interpersonal Skills                       9 Hrs 
 Communication Skills; Verbal and non-verbal communication; Active listening and 
feedback; Public speaking and presentation skills; Building and maintaining relationships; 
Conflict resolution and negotiation; Teamwork and collaboration; Importance of cultural 
sensitivity in a globalized world; Developing intercultural communication skills 
 
UNIT-IIICritical Thinking, Problem Solving and Self-Esteem                           9 
Hrs 
Enhancing analytical and critical thinking skills; Creative problem-solving 
techniquesDecision-making process; Confidence and Self-Esteem; Building self-confidence; 
Overcoming self-doubt and negative thinking; Techniques for boosting self-esteem. 
 
UNIT-IV Time Management and Stress Management                      7 Hrs 
Prioritization and productivity techniques; Overcoming procrastination; Identifying sources 
of stress; Techniques for managing and reducing stress; Work-life balance. 
 
UNIT-V Professional Development and Leadership Skills                    11 Hrs 
Resume writing and job interview skills; Professional etiquette and workplace 
behaviorNetworking skills; Traits of effective leaders; Leadership styles and theories; 
Developing leadership qualities; Personal Branding, Building a personal brand; Online 
presence and social media etiquette; Personal branding strategies; Final self-assessment and 
reflection on personal growth 
 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Develop a personal vision and mission statement to guide future actions and decisions. 
2. Exhibit improved verbal and non-verbal communication skills. 
3. Apply strategies to boost self-confidence and maintain high self-esteem. 
4. Implement effective time management techniques to enhance productivity. 
5. Develop and demonstrate leadership qualities in various scenarios. 
 
Text Books:  
1. Student’s Hand Book- Skill Genie-Higher Education Department, Govt. Of Andhra Pradesh 
https://svimstpt.ap.nic.in/edu/skill_genie.pdf. 
2. The only skill that matters- Jonathan.Levi (2019)- Super Human Enterprises, LLC. All rights 
reserved. ISBN:978-1-5445-0435-3 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Online courses and TED Talks on personality development and self-improvement. 
2. "How to Win Friends and Influence People" by Dale Carnegie (1936) Revised- 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201R                                 SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course explores the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies, and politics. 
Students will learn about the three pillars of social entrepreneurship and the different types of 
partners and their advantages. The course also covers the typical process steps of creating a 
marketing concept and describes the characteristics of the financing structure of social 
enterprises. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies and politics 
2. Explain the three pillars of social entrepreneurship. 
3. Describe different types of partners for social entrepreneurs and their particular 
advantages. 
4. Understand the typical process steps of a marketing conception. 
5. Describe the characteristics of the financing structure of social enterprises. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Introduction- Meaning of social entrepreneurship- concepts and typologies, its disparity 
with social business and CSR, social entrepreneur & personality, social enterprise. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Drivers and scope:Role of Social Entrepreneurship in -Societies, Economies and Politics, 
The Drivers of Social Entrepreneurship, Size and Scope of Social Entrepreneurship, 
Opportunities for Social Entrepreneurs. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Collaboration and Partnerships-Reasons for Crafting Collaborations, Specific Types of 
Collaborations, Different Collaboration Partners, Potential Risks and Challenges, Guidelines 
to Establish a Collaboration. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Elements of a Marketing Conception- Market analysis, Marketing Goals, Competitive 
Strategy, Measures, Controlling; Peculiarities Concerning Marketing for Social Enterprises, 
Marketing Importance for Social Enterprises. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Finance- Types of Financing Instruments- Donations, Equity capital, Debt capital, Hybrid 
capital; Financing institutions-value banks, social investment advisors, social stock exchange, 
Venture Philanthropy Funds, Social Investment Funds, Funding Consultancies 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Knowledge of social entrepreneurship differentiation from other related concepts 
2. Understand the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies and politics 
3. Analysis of different types of partners for social entrepreneurs. 
4. Understand the typical process steps of a marketing conception. 
5. Awareness of the peculiarities of financial elements in social enterprises 
 
Text Books:  
1. Christine K. Volkmann & Kim Oliver Tokarski. 2012.Social Entrepreneurship and Social 
Business. Springer Gabler 
2. Madhukar Shukla:Social Entrepreneurship in India. Sage publications 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Archana Singh (auth.) The Process of Social Value Creation: A Multiple-Case Study 
on Social Entrepreneurship in India. Springer India.2016. 
2. RyszardPraszkier; Andrzej Nowak. Social entrepreneurship : theory and practice [1 
ed.]. Cambridge University Press 
3. Alex Nicholls. Social Entrepreneurship: New Models of Sustainable Social Change. 
Oxford University Press, USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT1501                  PSYCHOLOGY & SOCIOLOGY                                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       3 0 0  3 
COURSE DESCRIPTION: 
This course provides a detailed discussion on various behavioral patterns of 
individuals,  theories of development, normal and abnormal aspects of motor, 
social, emotional and language development, communication and interaction 
skills appropriate to various age groups. 
Sociologywillintroducestudenttothebasicsociologyconcepts, principles and 
social process, social institutions in relation to the individual, family and 
community and the various social factors affecting the family in 
ruralandurbancommunitiesinIndiawillbe studied 
COURSE OBJECTIVES: 
1. Understand the fundamental concepts of psychology and its branches. 
2. Acquire knowledge on basic concepts of growth and development of personality. 
3. Acquire knowledge on basic theories of learning and types of personality 
4. Understand the role of family and community in the development of 
Human behavior. 
5. Learn to assess the social problems and participate in social planning. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                     7 hours 
INTRODUCTIONTOPSYCHOLOGY: 
Definition of Psychology, nature of psychology basic information in relation to 
the methods and branches. 
Methods of Psychology:Introspection,observation, interview, case study 
and experimental method. 
Branches of Psychology: General, socialabnormal, child, applied psychologyeducational, 
industrial, counselling, and clinical,parapsychologyandgerontology. 
HEREDITYANDENVIRONMENT: 
Twins, relative importance of heredity and environment,their role in relation to physical 
characteristics, intelligence and personality, nature-nurture controversy. 
GROWTHANDDEVELOPMENTBEHAVIOUR: 
 Infancy, childhood, adolescence, adulthood, middle age&oldage. 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                   10 hours 
MOTIVATION, EMOTION, INTELLIGENCE,PERSONALITY: 
MOTIVATION: 
Definition, drive,incentive,reinforcement,typesofmotivation,basic information 
aboutphysiologicalandpsychologicalneeds,Theories of motivation (Need 
theory,MaslowshierarchicalTheory) 
EMOTION: 
Definition, differentiate from feelings, physiological changes ofemotions,roleof RAS, 
hypothalamus, cerebralcortex,sympatheticnervous system,adrenal glands.Theories of emotion 
(James Lange and Cannon Burdtheories). 
INTELLIGENCE: 
Definition, Nature of Intelligence ,Mental Age concept(MA),Intelligence 
Quotient(IQ),assessment of intelligence (or)Intelligence tests. Weschler scales, WISC & 
WAIS, Bhatia performance test, Ravens Progressive Matrices (RPM). 
PERSONALITY: 
1) Definition, list of components, physical characteristics,character,abilities, 
temperament,interest,attitudes. 
2) Role of heredity, nervous system, 
physicalcharacteristics,abilities,familyandcultureonpersonalitydevelopment. 
3) Approaches:Typeapproach—Sheldon,Traitapproach–Cat tell and All port 
Psychoanalyticalapproach— Freud,psycho social approach—Eric Erikson and Neo 
Freudianapproach—Adler and Jung 
4)Personality Assessment-interview, rating scales, questionnaires and 
inventorieslikeMMPI,CPI,andBAIand16PF. 
5) Projective tests: Rorschach ink blot test, ThematicApperceptiontest 
(TAT),Children’sApperception, Test(CAT)RotterincompleteSentenceBlank(RISB).. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                  13 hours 
LEARNING: 
1) Definition,Natureoflearning. 
2) Types of learning: classical conditioning, operantconditioning, trial and error, 
Insightful and observationlearning. 
3) List the effective ways to learn: Massed vs spaced,wholevspart,readingvs recitation, 
rote vsmeaningful, Incidental vs intentional, knowledge of results andSQ3Rmethod. 
4) Reinforcement—meaningandtypes of schedules. 
5) Memory—shortermand long-term memoryandforgetting. 
THINKING: 
Definition,typesofthinking,processofthinkingandcreativethinking. 
FRUSTRATION: 
Definition, sources and measurement of frustrationConflicts—types, method store solve 
conflicts—adaptiveand defensive.. 
ATTITUDES; 
Definition-factors involved in attitude change and attitudemeasurement. 
SENSATION,ATTENTIONANDPERCEPTION: 
1) List the senses: Vision, hearing, olfactory, gustatory,and cutaneous, sensations, 
movement, equilibrium andvisceralsense. 
2) Define attention and list factors that determineattention: Nature of stimulus, 
intensity, color, changeextensity, repetition, movement, size, curiosity, primarymotives. 
3) Define perception and test the principle of perception,Figure and Ground,constancy, 
similarity, proximity,closure continuity, values and interests, past experience,context, 
needs, moods, religion, sex, age and 
socioeconomicstatus.Defineillusionandhallucination,typeofillusionandhallucinations.Visua
l,auditory and cutaneous. 
 
  DEFENCEMECHANISMS: Regression, compensation, projection, identification, 
repression, rationalization sublimation, daydreams ,with drawl anddenial 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                     14 hours 
INTRODUCTION:Definitions of Sociology, Sociology as a science ofsociety, uses of study 
of Sociology, application ofknowledgeofSociologyinPhysiotherapy. 
SOCIOLOGYANDHEALTH: 
Concepts of health and disease, social factors affectinghealth status, social consciousness and 
perception ofillness,decisionmakingintreatment 
SOCIALIZATIONMeaning of Socialization, types of Socializationinfluence of social 
factors on personality, socialization inhospital,socializationIntherehabilitationofpatients. 
SOCIALGROUPS: 
Concepts of social groups, classification of social groups,influence of formal and informal 
groups on health andsickness. Therole of primary groups and 
secondarygroupsinthehospitalandrehabilitationsettings 
FAMILY 
Meaning and characteristics of family, distinctivefeatures of families, types, basic needs, 
functions,influence of family on human personality, discussion ofchanges in the functions 
of a family, the effects ofsickness on family, family and psychosomatic diseases. 
COMMUNITY: 
Definition and elements of community, concepts ofcommunity, role of rural and 
urban communities 
inpublichealth,roleofcommunityindeterminingbeliefs,practicesandhomeremediesin 
treatment. 
CULTURE: 
Meaning, definition and characteristics material culture and non
materialculture,culturaldiffusion, 
culturallag,componentsofculture,impactofcultureonhumanbehavior,cultureinducedsy
mptomsanddiseases,sub-cultureof medical workers. 
RACE: 
A biological human stratification, theories of races,classificationofraces,racism 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                    16 hours 
SOCIALCHANGE: 
Meaning of social change, factors of social change,human adaptation and social change. 
Social change andstress,socialchangeandhealthprogrammes,theroleofsocial planning in the 
improvement of health and inrehabilitation. 
 
SOCIALCONTROL: 
Meaning of Social control, role of norms, folkways, customs, morals, religion, law and 
other means of socialcontrolintheregulationofhumanbehavior. 
 
SOCIALPROBLEMSOFTHEDISABLED: 
Consequences of the following social problems in relation to sickness and 
disability and remedies topreventtheseproblems.Population explosion Poverty, and 
unemployment,Beggary,Juveniledelinquency,Prostitution,Alcoholism,Problems of 
employed women 
TYPESOFDISABILITIESVIDEPERSONSWITHDISABILITIESACT-1995, 
withspecialreferenceto:-CerebralPalsy 
Four levels of mental retardationMultipledisabilities 
SOCIALWORKER: 
Theroleofamedicalsocialworker 
GERIATRIC CARE: ASOCIOLOGICALAPPROACH: 
Post retirement difficulties faced by the geriatricgroup, problem mitigation, services by 
governmentalagencies,servicesbyNGOslike(a)AgecareIndia 
(b) Help age India (c) Homes for senior citizensIndia 
SOCIALSECURITY: 
Retirement as social and economic event, Socialsecurity for civil servants, for 
general publicthrough insurance schemes, for industrial workers(ESI Act) 
including Workmen Compensation Actandsociallegislationinrelationtothedisabled. 
SOCIAL ADJUSTMENT AND SOCIALGERONTOLOGY: 
Social adjustment, Gerontology: ageing, socialaspects of ageing, sexual adjustment, 
economicaspects of ageing, the ageing process, health andmedical care. 
Course Outcomes: 
1.Apply the concepts of Attention, Perception and Sensation to assess the     
psychology of   humans. 
2.Understand the fundamental concepts of conflicts, frustration and its type. 
3.Analyse the theoretical concepts of Intelligence and Emotions. 
4.Understand the significance of social interaction in the process of rehabilitation. 
5.Appreciate the role of therapist as a member of the societyand the interdependence of 
individuals and society. 
Text books: 
1. GeneralPsychology-S.K. Mangal. 
2. Introduction to HealthPsychology-ShellyE.Taylor. 
3.Sachdeva, D.R. and Bhushan, An introduction to Sociology
Allahabad;KitabMahalLimited,1974 
4.TextBookofSociologyforPhysiotherapystudents-KPNeeraja 
5. SociologyforPhysiotherapy-SubbaRao 
Reference books: 
1.InvitationtoPsychology-Beenaand Parameswaran 
2.IntroductiontoPsychology-Atkinson and Hilgard. 
3.IntroductiontoPsychology-Morganandking. 
4.Psychologyappliedtomodernlife-WayneWeitenMargaretaL.Lord. 
5.PsychologyandSociologyforGNMandBPTstudent-JacobAnthikad 
6.MadanG.R.IndianSocialProblems,Vol.IMadras,Alliedpublications-1973. 
7.Social&PreventiveMedicine-J.E.Park. 
8.GeneralandMedicalSociology-Dr.P.Ramasamy. 
9.Psychology and Sociology for GNM and BPTstudents-JacobAnthikad. 
10.SociologyforNurses-CMAbraham. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT1502                                               ANATOMY-I                                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                              4 0 0  4 
Course Description: 
Thiscourseprovidesadetaileddiscussiononthestructureofhumanbodywhichises
sentialforclinicalstudies 
Course Objectives 
1. Understand the basics of anatomy. 
2. Study and Apply the Clinical knowledge on the Upper Extremity. 
3. Demonstrate the features of Head, Face & Neck: 
4. Understand the basics of general histology 
5. Demonstrate the concepts of anatomy in Brain, Endocrine glands 
UNIT-I                                                                                                  6 hours 
a. Introduction to Anatomy—Definition,anatomicalposition,anatomical planes, 
common anatomical terms, various methods of study ofanatomy
gross,systemic,radiologicaletc..Andsub divisions of anatomy-muscular, 
skeletal,cardio-vascularetc. 
b. Introduction to Osteology—Definition 
ofbone,classificationofbones,partsofalongbone,blood supply of a long bone, laws of 
ossification,epiphysisandtypes.Clinical application. 
c. Introduction to Myology — Definition, typesof muscles, classification of skeletal 
muscles—based on shape, location, function etc..Swing, shunt and spin muscles, and 
innervations of amuscle—motorunit, neuro-muscularjunction. 
d. Introduction to Arthrology—Definition,classification of joints with examples, 
leversystems of body, description of a synovial joint,synovial fluid, bursa, menisci with 
clinicalapplication. 
e. Introduction to Neuro anatomy —classificationofnervoussystem,partsofaneuronwith 
function, types of neurons, afferent andefferent nerves, components of a reflex arc, 
spinalsegments, formation of a plexus, peripheralnerve—motor, sensory, mixed and 
effects ofinjury. 
f. IntroductiontoCardio-vascularsystem
Arteriesandtheirclassification,endarteries,collateralcirculation, veins, sinusoids, arterio
venousanastomoses,componentsofalymphaticsystem—
lymphcapillaries,lymphnode,circulationofLymph 
UNIT-II                                                                                                 6 hours 
HISTOLOGY: 
GeneralHistology: 
1.Microscope—partsanddifferenttypeswiththeir uses for understanding the various 
levels ofstructuraldetails 
2. Cell-components, functions includingultrastructuraldetails. 
3. Tissue—classificationofbasictissuesandtheirfunction—epithelial, connective, 
muscular,nervous 
4. Epithelial tissue including glandularepithelia—
definition,classificationwithexamplesandfunction 
5. Connective tissue- components, classificationwith examples, deep fascia, tendons, 
ligaments,aponeuroses. Cartilage- types, structure, locationandfunctionsindetail. 
Bone—primary/secondary,lamellar/compact,growth and development, factors 
influencinggrowth and development, types of ossificationwithclinicalimportance in 
detail. 
6. Musculartissue—classification and structure ofcardiacandskeletalmusclesindetail -Sarcomere,intercalateddiscsetc... 
7. Nervoustissue—typesofneurons—unipolar,bipolar, multi polar, peripheral nerve 
LS—axon,myelin sheath, nodes of Ranvier, - peripheralnerve TS with its coverings —
epineurium,perineurium, endoneurium. 
8. Circulatory system—TS of large sized artery, medium sizedarteryandlargesizedvein. 
9. Lymphoidtissue—Lymphnode,Tonsil,Thymus,Spleen. 
10. Skinanditsappendages.-flexioncreases,Langer’slines. 
SystemicHistology: 
1. Respiratorysystem—Trachea,lung. 
2. Nervoussystem: 
a.Spinalcord—cervical,thoracicandlumbarlevels, 
b.cerebrum&cerebellum 
UNIT-III                                                                                            18 hours 
Upper Limb  
Osteology: Clavicle, Scapula, humerus, radius, ulna, articulated hand. 
Soft parts: Breast, pectoral region, axilla, front of arm, back of arm, cubital 
fossa, front of fore arm, back of fore arm, palm, dorsum of hand, muscles, 
nerves, blood vessels and lymphatic drainage of upper extremity. 
Joints: Shoulder girdle, shoulder joint, elbow joints, radio ulnar joint, wrist 
joint and joints of the hand. 
Applied Anatomy - Erbs and Klumpkes paralysis, wrist drop, carpal
 tunnel, claw hand, winging of scapula. 
Surface anatomy and X-rays 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                    13 hours 
Head, Face & Neck:  
Osteology: Articulated skull & mandible, cervical vertebrae, foetal skull, 
joints 
Soft parts: Scalp, face, fascia of neck, triangles of neck, muscles of neck, 
cranial cavity, dural venous sinuses, meninges, cranial nerves, extra ocular 
muscles of eye ball, muscles of mastication. 
Thyroid, parotid, submandibular gland 
Oral cavity, tongue, teeth, tonsil 
Nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses 
Ear, larynx, pharynx, palate, trachea, oesophagus, surface anatomy and X
rays. 
UNIT-V                                                                                               17 hours 
Brain, Endocrineglands: 
Brain:  
a. Meninges, surfaces and parts of cerebrum, cerebellum, brainstem 
b. Medulla — gross and sectional anatomy with special attention to motor 
and sensory tracts , cardiac, respiratory centers 
c. Pons — Gross and sectional anatomy 
d. Midbrain — Gross and sectional anatomy 
e. Cerebellum- lobes, fissures, cerebellar peduncles 
F. Cerebrum — sulci, gyri and functional areas 
g.Thalamus, hypothalamus, basal ganglia, limbic system, reticular formation 
h.Tracts — Pyramidal, extra pyramidal,optic pathway, auditory path way, 
gustatory path way 
i.Blood supply.Ventricular system of brain and CSF. 
j.Cranial nerves — location of nuclei, course, termination and effects 
ofinjuries at various levels 
k.Applied anatomy of — Hemiplegia, Internal capsule, medial and lateral 
medullary syndromes etc. 
8.Endocrine glands:  
Position, shape, size, function, blood supply and nerve supply of the 
hypothalamus and pituitary gland, thyroid glands, parathyroid glands, adrenal 
glands, pancreatic islets, ovaries and testes, pineal glands, thymus. 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand the basics of anatomy. 
2. Study and Apply the Clinical knowledge on the Upper Extremity. 
3. Demonstrate the features of Head,Face&Neck 
4. Understand the basics of general histology 
5. Demonstrate the concepts of anatomy in Brain, Endocrine glands 
6. Work independently or in team to solve problems with effective 
communication 
Textbooks: 
GrossAnatomy(AnyOne): 
1.Human anatomy by I.B. Singh-Volumes. 
2.Human Anatomy B.D.ChaurasiaVolumes General Anatomy 
3.HandbookofGeneralAnatomybyB.D.Chaurasia 
4.PrinciplesofGeneralAnatomybyA.K.Datta 
Microanatomy 
5.TextbookofHumanHistologywithcolourAtlas.Inderbir Singh  
6.AtlasofHistologybyDiFioreNeuro anatomy: 
7.Textbook of Human Neuro anatomy by InderbirSingh. 
8.Clinical Neuro anatomy for medical students byVishram Singh  
Genetics (AnyOne): 
1.EssentialsofHumanEmbryologybyBhatnagar,Kothari,Mehta. 
2.Human Genetics by S.D.Gangane 
Referencebooks:- 
1.Principles of anatomy and physiology by Tortora 
2.CunninghamsManualofPracticalAnatomy 
3.ClinicalAnatomyforMedicalStudentsbyRichard Snell 
4.MOORE [KiethL],Clinically Oriented Anatomy 
5.Anatomy&PhysiologybyRoss&Wilsons,8thedition,ChurchillLivingston. 
6.Grays Anatomy. 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT1503                           PHYSIOLOGY-I                                            L T P C 
                                                                                                                        3  0  0  3 
CourseDescription: 
This course provides a detailed in-depth discussion on fundamental reactions 
of living organisms specific to human body. It emphasizes the concepts of 
cell, primary tissue, connective tissue, skin, muscle, nervous tissue, blood, 
lymphoid tissues, and gastrointestinal tract. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of General physiology of cell and body fluids 
2. Apply various techniques for estimation of blood cells. 
3. Understand the classification and mechanism of nerve muscle physiology. 
4. Work independently or in team to solve problems with 
effective communication. 
5.Understand the concepts of basics of physiology of Nervous system 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                     2hours 
CELL :Outline of basic concepts of cell structure, functions of components transport across 
membranes. 
SKIN  
Structure;functions;bloodflow;temperatureregulation 
UNIT-II        
BLOOD  6hours 
i.Outline of components and their functions — RBC, WBC, Platelets 
ii.Blood groups. 
iii.Significance of RBC & WBC counts, ESR and other related tests. 
iv.Clotting mechanisms 
v.Blood volume and its regulation 
UNIT-III 
NerveMusclePhysiology                                                                                        12hours 
I. Structure of muscle tissue: Gross structure and microscopic structure. Arrangement of 
myofibrils. Myoneural junction. 
ii.Chemical processes involved in muscle contraction. 
iii.Physiology of muscle contraction, simple muscle twitch, quantal summation, wave 
summation, treppe, tetany, effects of temperature changes. All or none law. Fatigue, isotonic, 
isometric and isokinetic contractions 
UNIT-IV 
DIGESTION                                                                                                                 3hours 
I. Digestion in the mouth, stomach and intestine 
ii.Gastric juice, bile, pancreatic juice, intestinal juice 
iii.Mechanics of control of secretions and motility 
iv.Diet, nutrition. 
UNIT-V 
NERVOUS SYSTEM                                                                                      22hours 
I. Introduction to nervous system. 
ii.Neural tissue — 
a. Neuron 
b. Neuroglia 
iii.Classification of nerve fibers. 
iv.Properties of nerve fibers 
v.Degeneration and regeneration of nerve fibers. 
vi. Receptors 
vii.Synapse 
viii.Neurotransmitters 
ix.Reflex activity 
x.Spinal cord 
xi.Pathways in spinal cord — ascending and descending tracts 
xii.Physiology of pain 
xiii.Brain stem 
xiv.Thalamus 
xv.Internal capsule 
xvi.Hypothalamus. 
xvii.Basal ganglia 
xviii.Cerebral cortex 
xix.Limbic system 
xx.Reticular formation 
xxi.Proprioceptors 
xxii.Muscle tone, posture and equilibrium 
xxiii.Vestibular apparatus 
xxiv.CSF 
xxv.Autonomic nervous system 
SPECIAL SENSES  
Vision, audition, olfaction, gustation, vestibular apparatus 
Practical/lab 
HAEMATOLOGY:                                                                                                  16hours 
1)Demonstration of packed cell volume 
2)Estimation of Haemoglobin by Sahlis method 
3)Determination of total RBC count 
4)Determination of total WBC count 
5)Determination of differential leucocyte count 
6)Determination of Blood groups 
7)Determination of Bleeding time and clotting time 
8)Determination of E.S.R 
HUMANEXPERIMENTS                                                                        14hours 
1.Clinical examination of sensory nervous system 
2.Clinical examination of motor nervous system and reflexes 
3.Examination of light reflexes and hearing tests. 
4.Clinical examination of cranial nerves. 
5.Clinical examination of colour vision and acuity of vision. 
Course outcomes: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of General physiology of cell and body fluids 
2. Apply various techniques for estimation of blood cells. 
3. Understand the classification and mechanism of nerve muscle physiology. 
4. Work independently or in team to solve problems with effective communication. 
5. Learn about the physiology of nervous system. 
Text books: 
1.Medical physiologyby ABS Mahapatra 
2.Essentials of Medical physiologybysembulingam 
Reference books: - 
1Text Book of Human Physiology by Chatterji 
2.Human Physiology by Chaudary. 
3.Human Physiology by Guyton. 
4.Concise Physiology for Under Graduates - Prof. A.K. JAIN. 
5.R. Chandra Mouli - Text Book of Physiology. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     SEMESTER-II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1102                      ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES                                 L T P C 
                                                                                                                                3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides degree-seeking students with an array of opportunities to learn, practice 
and motivate communities on environmental importance. It further helps to understand the 
resources, optimize the recourses in future days, and address the gaps in the eco system. 
 
Course Objectives:  
Students undergoing this course are expected to:  
1. Understand eco system and scope of multidisciplinary 
2. Creating the awareness about environmental problems among people.  
3. Imparting basic knowledge about the environment and its allied problems. 
4. Developing an attitude of concern for the environment. 
5. Understand the developments in global goals 
Unit-I           8 Hrs 
Multidisciplinary nature of environmental studies; Definition, scope and importance; 
Need for public awareness; Natural Resources: Renewable and non-renewable resources; 
Forest resources: Water resources: Mineral resources; Food resources: Energy resources: 
Land resources; Equitable use of resources for sustainable lifestyles; Natural resources and 
associated problems. 
 
Unit-II            8 Hrs 
Ecosystems: Concept of anecosystem.; Introduction, types, characteristic features, structure 
and function of the following ecosystem: - Forest ecosystem; Grassland ecosystem; Desert 
ecosystem; Aquatic ecosystems (ponds, streams, lakes, rivers, oceans,estuaries); Environment 
ProtectionAct,1986; Public awareness.; Environment and humanhealth. 
 
Unit-III            8 Hrs 
Biodiversity and its conservation: Introduction – Definition- genetic, species and 
ecosystemdiversity.; Biogeographical classification of India; India as a mega-diversitynation; 
Hot-sports of biodiversity.; Threats to biodiversity: habitat loss, poaching of wildlife, man
wildlifeconflicts.; Endangered and endemic species ofIndia; Conservation of biodiversity: In
situ and Ex-situ conservation of biodiversity. 
 
Unit- IV           8 Hrs 
Environmental Pollution Definition; Cause, effects and control measures ofAir pollution; 
Waterpollution; Soil pollution; Marine pollution; Noise pollution; Thermalpollution and 
nuclear hazards - Solid waste Management: Causes, effects and control measures of urban 
and industrial wastes. -  Role of an individual in prevention of pollution - Disaster 
management: floods, earthquake, cyclone andlandslides. 
 
 
Unit-V           8 Hrs 
Social Issues and the Environment: From Unsustainable to Sustainabledevelopment; Water 
conservation- rain water harvesting- watershedmanagement; Resettlement and rehabilitation 
of people; its problems and concerns.; Environmental ethics: Issues and possiblesolutions.; 
Climate change, global warming, acid rain, ozone layer depletion, nuclear accidents and 
holocaust - Wastelandreclamation.; Consumerism and wasteproducts.; Population and 
environment. 
Field work          5 Hrs 
Field visits to nearby; awareness campaign; special lectures by experts; quiz, debate 
competitions, short film Contest, rally etc 
           
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of this course, students should be able to:   
1. Understand key concepts from economic, political, and social analysis as they pertain 
to the design and evaluation of environmental policies and institutions. 
2. Appreciate concepts and methods from ecological and physical sciences and their 
application in environmental problem solving. 
3. Appreciate the ethical, cross-cultural, and historical context of environmental issues 
and the links between human and natural systems. 
4. Reflect critically about their roles and identities as citizens, consumers and 
environmental activists 
5. Be part in Development goals and educating the communities. 
    
Text Books:  
1. Textbook of Environmental Studies (English, Paperback, Asthana D. K.) S.Chand & co , New 
Delhi 
2. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses, Erach BHaruchu, UGC, 
KINDLE Edition, Amazon. 
 Reference Book: 
1. Encyclopedia of Environment and Society- set of 5 volumes, Sage Publications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1202C             HINDI                                                     LT PC 
                                                                                                                                       3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब, 
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
 
CourseObjectives: 
1. बबबबबब, बबबबबबबबबबबबबब,बबबबबबब, बबबबबबबबबबबबबबब, 
बबबबबब, बबबबबबबबबबबबबब, बबबबबबबबब, बबबबबबबबबबब 
बबबबबब 
2. बबबब, बबब, बबब, बबबबब, बबबब, बबबबबबबबब, 
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
3. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब,  
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब, 
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
4. बबब - बबबबबबबब, बबबबब - बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब – बबबब 
5. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब - बबबबबबबबब,बबबबबबबबबबबब - 
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब,       
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबब - बबबबबबबब 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
1. बबबबबब, बबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
2. बबबबबबब, बबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
3. बबबबबब, बबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
4. बबबबबब, बबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
 
UNIT-II          9Hrs 
1. बबबब,बबब, बबब,बबबब 
2. बबबब, बबबबबबबबब 
3. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
 
UNIT-III (पपपपपपपप )                     9Hrs 
1. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
2. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
3. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
 
UNIT-IV  ( कहानी और कहानीकार)                                                                    9 Hrs 
1. बबब  -बबबबबबबब 
2. बबबबब - बबबबबबबबबबबबब 
3. बबबबब – बबबब 
 
 
UNIT-V(कवि और कविता                                                                                9 Hrs 
1. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब - बबबबबबबबबब 
2. बबबबबबबबबबबब - बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
3. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबब - बबबबबबबब 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
2. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
3. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
4. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
5. बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
 
TextBooks: 
1. हिन्दीव्याकरण 
2. हिश्वनाथहििारीकीहििंदीकहििा 
3. प्रेमचिंबबबबबबबबबबब 
 
ReferenceBooks: 
बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब
बब 
1. बबबबबबबबबबबबब -बबबबबबबबबबबबबबब,बबबबबबबबबबब 
2.बबबबबबबब बबबबबबबबबबबब - बबबबबबबबबब 
3.बबबबबबबब बबबबबबबबबबबब- बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
4.बबबबबबबब बबबब - बबबबबबबबबबबबबबबबब 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1202D                 PROFESSIONAL ENGLISH    L T P C 
                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course aims to enhance the English language proficiency of engineering students in 
professional contexts. Through a combination of theoretical knowledge and practical 
exercises, students will develop their skills in technical writing, oral communication, 
presentation, and critical thinking. The course will focus on various aspects of professional 
communication, including report writing, academic writing, technical presentations, and 
effective communication in interdisciplinary teams. Additionally, students will engage with 
real-world engineering scenarios to apply language skills in practical contexts. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Develop proficiency in technical writing for engineering reports, research proposals, 
and documentation. 
2. Enhance oral communication skills for effective presentations, meetings, and 
discussions and thereby improve their employability skills. 
3. Improve critical thinking and analytical skills through the evaluation of technical 
information and arguments. 
4. Foster teamwork, collaboration skills in interdisciplinary engineering projects. 
5. Develop awareness of cultural and linguistic diversity in professional settings. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Pronunciation:Course techniques include recordings, partner work, group activities and one
on-one instructor feedback. Your speech will become clearer, more fluent and easier to 
understand. You'll improve your enunciation of individual sounds, intonation, stress patterns, 
pace and pausing.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Speaking Professionally:You’ll build greater confidence through individual work, group 
interaction and feedback from your peers and instructor. To express yourself more clearly and 
concisely, whether you are speaking in impromptu situations or making well-planned 
Presentations. Focus on language that familiarizes you with the use of English in everyday 
situations and contexts. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Refine Your Grammar: Express yourself more accurately and eloquently by improving 
your English Grammar. You’ll get the strong foundation you need to write and speak more 
clearly, precisely and persuasively. You’ll explore the relationship between words in 
sentences, and analyse structure and meaning, clarify common problem points and improve 
punctuation. You’ll have the opportunity to practice with your peers and get helpful 
feedback. You’ll also learn what resources are best for ongoing grammar help. You’ll apply 
them to produce effective, concise written work with newfound confidence. You’ll express 
yourself more clearly and persuasively by using varied, well-structured sentences and placing 
content more strategically. You’ll also develop editing skills to rid your work of errors.  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Writing Essentials – Professional Writing  
Improve your written English for personal, professional and academic purposes. You’ll refine 
your sentence structure, punctuation and verb tenses, and eliminate the most common errors 
that confuse readers. You’ll enhance your writing style. Develop editing skills that help you 
revise your work.  Lectures, discussions, e-learning tools and assignments will help you 
develop the communication skills you’ll need in today’s business environment.  
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
You’ll be equipped to create power packed Power Point Presentations. Be in better stead to 
introducing yourself. To know the nuances that goes into the presenting of information, and 
articulating information. Know how to make an impressive introduction. To imbibe Life 
Skills that is necessary to lead a fruitful and a fulfilling life. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course the student will be able: 
1. To understand the importance of Professional English in work place and learn the correct 
pronunciation and delivery of speech. 
2. To read technical proposals properly and make them to write good technical reports. 
3. To achieve better comprehending skills,vocabulary and professional speaking skills. 
4. To learn and identify the Common Errors in Writing and Speaking. 
5. Acquire digital competence, employment and workplace communication skills. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Technical Communication: Process and Product by Sharon J. Gerson and Steven M. Gerson 
2. Engineering Communication: From Principles to Practice by David Ingre, C. O'Brien 
3. Technical Writing Basics: A Guide to Style and Form by Brian R. Holloway 
 
Reference Books: 
1. The Encyclopaedia Britannica" - A comprehensive general encyclopaedia covering a wide 
range of topics. 
2. The Oxford English Dictionary (OED)" - A comprehensive dictionary of the English language. 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1202A                                        FRENCH                             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to French by intensively studying important aspects of 
pronunciation, vocabulary, grammar and sentence formation through practice sets and audio 
visual lessons. It introduces the workings and sounds of the language and provides the 
necessary tools to enable students to make sentences from scratch. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To train the students to know about France, French culture and basics 
2. To teach them to learn basic grammar and vocabulary. 
3. To train them to learn tenses in French 
4. To train them to talk about their daily routine 
5. To train them to converse in French in day-to-day scenarios 
 
UNIT-I9 Hrs 
Introduction to France and its regions - French alphabets and numbers, countries and 
nationality 
Grammaire – Verbs  – s’appeler, être, avoir, definite and indefinite articles 
Communication – Greetings, Self Introduction 
 
UNIT-II9 Hrs 
Basic vocabulary, colours, months and days 
Grammaire - Verbes - Conjugation : Present tense (ER, IR, RE ending verbs) – Adjective 
possesive Communication – Talk about family and friends, date, time etc. 
  
UNIT-III9 Hrs 
Hobbies, interests and daily routine 
Grammaire – Irregular verbs – Releflexive verbs - Future proche  
Communication – Talking about hobbies and interests      
 
UNIT-IV9 Hrs 
Vocabulary of places and  transport  
Grammaire – Pertinent verbs, adjective demonstrative, past tense, propositions 
Communication – Narrating an incident or story       
 
UNIT-V9 Hrs 
Vocabulary of food, services, money 
Grammaire – Negation, Verbs – acheter, manger, payer, articles partitifs. Communication – 
Accept and refuse an invitation, situation in a restaurant 
  
Course Outcomes: 
After the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Acquire familiarity in the French alphabet & basic vocabulary 
2. Listen and identify individual sounds of French  
3. Use basic sounds and words while speaking 
4. Read and understand simple advertisements, brochures and invitations  
5. Understand and use basic grammar and appropriate vocabulary in completing languagetasks 
 
Text Books: 
1. Grammaire Progressive du Français, CLÉ International, 2010. 
2. Saison 1, Marie-Noëlle Cocton et al, Didier, 2014. 
3. Cosmopolite A1 - Nathalie Hirschsprung, Tony Tricot 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Préparation à l’examen du DELF A1 – Hachette 
2. Réussir le DELF A1 – Bruno Girardeau  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1202B                                                GERMAN    L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3  0 0  3 
Course Description: German Language Training 
Course Objectives: 
1. Importance of German Language in Global prospective 
2. To develop Reading skills for Basic Level 
3. German writing skills, particularly emails & short messages  
4. To develop basic German Speaking skills in order to meet the General activities 
5. Listening practise to understand German Accent of the Native German Speakers 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
GUTEN TAG!:Saying hello and goodbye, introducing oneself and others, talking  about 
oneself and others, numbers 1-20, spelling words and names, talking about countries and 
languages, the alphabet, first  verbs in present tense, how to ask questions, useful terms and 
expressions    
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
FRUENDE, KOLLEGEN UND ICH: Talking about hobbies, days of the week, numbers 
from 20 on up, months and seasons in the year, talking about work and job, definite article, 
personal pronouns, the verbs to have (haben) and to be (sein), plurals of nouns. 
  
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs
  
IN DER STADT:Getting around a town and asking for the way, giving directions, indefinite 
articles, negation with kein, imperative forms.       
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
GUTEN APPETIT!:Talking about food, planning a trip to the grocery store, food and meals 
and talking about it, verbs that require the accusative      
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
TAG FÜR TAG:Telling and understanding time, talking about one's family, possessive 
articles (mein, dein) and modal auxiliaries (müssen, können, wollen).   
     
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic Reading skills 
2. Basic Writing skills with basic Grammar 
3. Speaking skills and to do advance German Course 
4. Understanding basic German for Daily Communication  
5. Awareness of European Union and opportunities in Europe 
 
Text Books: 
1. A1-German Level- Netzwerk A1 Book- Prescribed by International Institute- Goethe Institute 
Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
BPTT1504                                          ANATOMY-II                                         L T P C 
                                                                                                                               4 0  0  4 
Course Description: 
This course provides a detailed discussion on the Macroscopic 
&MicroscopicstructureandfunctionsofthehumanbodyanditsDevelopmentwhich 
isessentialforclinicalstudies. 
CourseObjectives: 
1. Study and Apply the Clinical knowledge on the Lower Extremity. 
2. Apply anatomical knowledge in clinical practice. 
3. Demonstrate the features of theThorax&Vertebral column 
4. Demonstrate anatomicalknowledgeof theabdomen&pelvisinclinical practice 
5. Demonstrate theconceptsofanatomyinembryology. 
UNIT-I: 
GENETICS                                                                                                     4hours 
I. Introduction to human genetics — mitosis, meiosis, Mendels laws, 
II.Cytogenetics - karyotype, karyotyping, Barr-body. 
III.Modes of Inheritance — Autosomal dominant and recessive, Y- linked inheritance, X 
linked dominant and recessive, pedigree charting 
IV.Medical Genetics: Chromosomal aberrations, - Structural: deletion, duplication, 
translocation etc., numerical: Down, Turner, Klinefelter syndromes 
V.Clinical Genetics: Prenatal diagnosis, Genetic counselling. 
VI.Recent advances — Gene-therapy, stem cell therapy 
UNIT-II 
EMBRYOLOGY                                                                                        8hours 
a)Ovum, Spermatozoa, fertilization and formation of the Germ layers and their derivations. 
b)Development of skin, fascia, blood vessels, lymphatics. 
c)Development of pharyngeal arches and their derivatives. 
d)Development of heart and major vessels — aorta, superior vena cava,inferior vena cava, 
axillary, femoral, carotid etc.. 
e)Development of respiratory system. 
f)Development of bones, axial and appendicular skeleton and muscles. 
g)Development of nervous system - neural tube, brain vesicles and spinal cord, formation of 
grey matter, white matter, tracts, myelination and neural tube defects. 
UNIT-III 
LOWER LIMB                                                                          20hours 
a.Osteology: Hip bone, femur, tibia, fibula, patella, articulated foot 
b.Soft parts: Gluteal region, front and back of the thigh (femoral triangle, femoral canal and 
inguinal canal), medial side of the thigh, adductor canal, popliteal fossa, anterior and 
posterior compartment of leg, sole and dorsum of the foot, lymphatic drainage of lower limb, 
venous drainage of the lower limb, blood supply of the lower limb, arches of foot. 
c.Joints: hip joint, knee joint, ankle joint, joints of the foot. 
d.Applied anatomy of - femoral sheath, femoral canal, sciatic nerve and its branches, 
obturator nerve, foot drop, varicose veins and various joints. 
E.Surface anatomy and X-rays. 
UNIT-IV:                                                                                                               20hours 
Thorax:  
Osteology: thoracic vertebrae,sternum, ribs and joints 
a. Soft parts - Intercostal muscles and accessory muscles of respiration: origin, insertion, 
nerve supply and action. Diaphragm: origin, insertion, nerve supply and action, openings in 
the diaphragm. Intercostal space-boundaries, intercostal nerves and vessels. Movements of 
respiration. 
b.Cardio — vascular system- mediastinum: divisions and contents - pericardium: thoracic 
wall: position, shape and parts of the heart; conducting system; blood Supply and nerve 
supply of the heart 
c.Respiratory system- Outline of respiratory passages - pleura and lungs: position, parts, 
relations, blood supply and nerve supply; lungs —emphasize on broncho-pulmonary 
segments 
d.Azygos vein, oesophagus, trachea and thoracic duct. 
e.Surface anatomy and X-rays 
Back:  
a. Osteology: vertebral column, curvatures, intervertebral discs, movements. 
b.soft parts: muscles of back, thoracolumbar fascia. 
c.Spinal cord & Meninges — tracts, blood supply 
d.Applied anatomy of posture & gait, line of gravity, centre of gravity. abnormal curvatures, 
prolapsed of intervertebral disc, lumbar puncture. 
e.Surface anatomy and X-rays 
UNIT-V 
Abdomen and Pelvis:                                                                               8hours 
a.Osteology: lumbar vertebrae, pelvis (male & female), sacrum, joints 
b.Soft parts: Anterior abdominal wall, Rectus sheath, external genitalia, inguinal canal. 
c.Organs- stomach, small intestine, large intestine, liver, pancreas, spleen, urinary system, 
supra renal glands, reproductive system male and female — supports of uterus. 
d.Perineum: male, female — superficial and deep perineal pouches, ischio-rectal fossa, pelvic 
diaphragm. 
E.Applied anatomy of reproductive system and perineum in parturition and family planning. 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Study and Apply the Clinical knowledge on the Lower Extremity. 
2.Apply anatomical knowledge in clinical practice. 
3.Understand the features of the Thorax & Vertebral column 
4. Anatomical knowledge of the abdomen & pelvis in clinical practice 
5.Learn the concepts of anatomy in embryology. 
Textbooks: 
Gross Anatomy(AnyOne): 
1. Human anatomy by I.B. Singh-Volumes. 
2.Human Anatomy B.D. Chaurasia Volumes 
General Anatomy(AnyOne): 
1.Hand book of General Anatomy by B.D. Chaurasia 
2. Principles ofGeneralAnatomybyA.K.Datta 
Micro anatomy(AnyOne): 
1.Textbook of Human Histology with colour Atlas.InderbirSingh 
2.Atlas of Histology by DiFiore 
Neuro anatomy: 
1.Text book of Human Neuro anatomy by Inderbir Singh. 
2.Clinical Neuro anatomy for medical students by VishramSingh 
Genetics (Any One):  
1.Essentials of Human Embryology byBhatnagar,Kothari,Mehta. 
2.Human Genetics by S.D.Gangane 
Reference books:  
1. Principles of anatomy and physiology by Tortora 
2. Cunninghams Manual of Practical Anatomy 
3. Clinical Anatomy for Medical Students by Richard Snell 
4. MOORE [Kieth L], Clinically Oriented Anatomy 
5. Anatomy & Physiology by Ross & Wilsons, 8th edition, Churchill Livingston. 
6. Grays Anatomy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT1505                          PHYSIOLOGY-II                                                      L T P C 
                                                                                                                                  3  0  0   3 
Course Description: 
This course provides a detailed in-depth discussion of the fundamental reactions of living 
organisms specific to the human body. It emphasizes the concepts of cells, primary tissue, 
connective tissue, skin, muscle, nervous tissue, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, uterus, urinary 
tract, pregnancy, and endocrine system. 
Course Objectives: 
1.UnderstandthebasicconceptsofCirculatorySystem. 
2.Understandthemechanismsofurineformationanditssignificance 
3.Correlatethemechanismsofhormonalactionandtheirinfluenceonthehumanbody. 
4.GainknowledgeaboutvariousReproductivesystem. 
5. Understand the importance of the role of exercise in physical and mentalwell
beingandphysiologicalchangesduringExercisesinvarioussystems 
UNIT-I 
CIRCULATION 14hours  
Structure & Properties of cardiac muscle, cardiac cycle. 
i.ECG, Heart sounds, cardiac output. 
ii. Factors regulating the action of the heart. 
iii. Blood pressure — its maintenance and regulation. 
iv. Cerebral circulation, renal circulation, pulmonary circulation. 
V .Effects of exercise, effects of postural changes. 
vi. Lymph, factors affecting flow of lymph. 
UNIT-II 
RESPIRATION 12 hours 
I.Defense mechanisms in the respiratory tract, mucociliary transport, mechanics of 
respiration. 
ii. Transport of blood gases. Acid-base balance. 
iii. Lung function tests (including lung volumes), Artificial ventilation. 
iv. Nervous and chemical regulation of respiration 
v. Hypoxia-types and causes 
vi. Effects of exercise on respiration. 
UNIT-III 
EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY  4 hours 
I. Exercise metabolism. Oxygen debt, Respiratory quotient 
ii.Development of endurance, factors affecting endurance and muscle strength. Factors 
affecting general and cardiorespiratory endurance. Aerobic and anaerobic work. Efficiency of 
muscular activity, aerobic versus anaerobic (eg.speed, work, load, fatigue, diet, obesity) 
iii.Age and exercise, age changes in muscle function, age changes in CVS, age changes in 
pulmonary function, age and physical work capacity, age and nervous system. 
iv.Environment and exercise, adaptation to heat and cold, exercise in heat and in cold. Human 
limitation in heat, acclimatization to heat, exercise at high altitudes. 
UNIT-IV 
EXCRETION    11 hours 
i. Structure of nephron 
ii. Formation of urine 
iii. Micturition 
ENDOCRINES  
Outline of the various hormones and their actions with special emphasis on thyroid and 
parathyroid hormones 
UNIT-V 
REPRODUCTION  4 hours 
i. Male reproductive system. 
ii. Female reproductive system 
iii. Outline of pregnancy, functions of placenta, parturition, lactation and contraceptive 
measures. 
iv.Physiology of foetus, factors that affect foetal growth 
HUMAN EXPERIMENTS30hours 
1.ExaminationofRadial pulse 
2.Recording of systemic arterial blood pressure andeffect ofexerciseon BP 
3.Examination of chest for heart 
4.Examination of chest for lungs 
5.Pulmonary functiontests 
6.Demonstration of vital capacity measurement andPeak expiratoryflowrate 
COURSEOUTCOMES: 
1.Understand the basic concepts of Circulatory System. 
2.Understand the mechanisms of urine formation and its significance 
3.Correlate the mechanisms of hormonal action and their influence on the human body. 
4.Gain knowledge about various Reproductive system. 
5.Understand the importance of the role of exercise in physical and mental well-being and 
physiological changes during Exercises in various systems 
Text books 
1.Medical physiologyby ABS Mahapatra 
2.Essentials of Medical physiologybysembulingam 
Reference books: - 
1.Text Book of Human Physiology by Chatterji 
2.Human Physiology by Chaudary. 
3.Human Physiology by Guyton. 
4.Concise Physiology for Under Graduates - Prof. A.K. JAIN. 
5.R. Chandra Mouli - Text Book of Physiology. 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT1506                                     BIO-CHEMISTRY                                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                3 0 0  3 
CourseDescription: 
This course provides a detailed in-depth discussion of the  Biochemicaland 
functional organization of the cell and sub cellular organelles. Basic structural, biochemical 
and functional aspects of bio molecules and their interrelations and about the nutrients 
Course Objectives: 
1.Biochemical and functional organization of the cell and sub cellular organelles.Basic 
structural, biochemical and functional aspects of bio molecules and their interrelations. 
3.Basic and clinical aspects of enzymology. 
4.Basic and nutritional aspects of vitamins 
5.Basic principles of biological oxidation and bioenergetics.Outlines of digestion and 
absorption of bio molecules 
UNIT-I 
NUTRITION:   5 hours 
a) Importance of nutrition 
b) Calorimetry - energy values, calorimeters, respiratory quotient and its significance, 
specific dynamic action of food. 
c) Basal metabolic rate - definition, normal values, factors affecting B.M.R. food, energy 
expenditure for various activities. 
d) Nutritional aspects of carbohydrates, fat and fibers 
e) Nutritional aspects of proteins - essential and non essential amino acids, chemical score, 
digestibility coefficient, biological value, net protein utilization, nutritional classification of 
proteins (complete and incomplete), nitrogen balance and its significance. 
f) Composition of food, balanced diet, dietary recommendations, nutritional supplementation. 
g) Protein - energy malnutrition, Kwashiorkor and Marasmus 
UNIT-II 
CARBOHYDRATES, LIPIDS,PROTEINS: 15 hours 
a) Definition, chemistry, classification, common carbohydrates, their sources and 
composition. 
b) Digestion and absorption of carbohydrates. 
c) Glycolysis - aerobic, anaerobic, energetics, regulation, Coris cycle, Gluconeogenesis. 
d) Citric acid cycle and its energetics 
e) Glycogenesis, glycogenolysis and their regulation, role of liver and muscle glycogen. 
f) Hormonal regulation of blood sugar level. 
g) Metabolic disorders of glycogen, lactose intolerance, diabetes mellitus. 
LIPIDS:  
a) Definition, classification of lipids, classification of fatty acids, examples and functions of 
common lipids, essential fatty acids and their importance. 
b) Classification, sources and functions of lipoproteins 
c) Digestion and absorption of lipids 
d) Beta-oxidation and its energetics, regulation 
e) Fatty acid biosynthesis, energetics, regulation 
f) Fat metabolism in adipose tissue, lipoprotein lipase, hormone sensitive lipase. 
g) Ketone body formation and utilisation 
h) Cholesterol and its importance, common hyperlipoproteinemia. 
PROTEINS:  
a) Definitions of proteins and amino acids, classification of amino acids and proteins, 
essential amino acids, functions of amino acids and proteins 
b) Enzymes - definition, coenzymes, factors affecting enzyme activity, regulation of enzyme 
activity, enzyme inhibition, isoenzymes and clinical significance of 
enzymes. 
c) Digestion and absorption of proteins. 
d) Transamination, deamination and urea cycle. 
e) Specialised products produced from amino acids — Phenylalanine, Tyrosine, Tryptophan, 
Arginine, Glycine, Methionine 
UNIT-III                                                                                  10 hours 
MUSCLE CONTRACTION: Contractile elements in muscle, process of muscle contraction. 
CONNECTIVE TISSUE: Biochemistry of connective tissue, collagen, glycoproteins, 
proteoglycans. 
CELL BIOLOGY: Cell membrane structure, mechanism of transport across cell 
membrane, intracellular organelles and their functions, briefly cytoskeleton. 
HORMONE ACTION: Classification of hormones and mechanism of hormone action 
I. Receptors, signal transduction, second messengers (Ca, cAMP, Inositol Phosphates) and 
their role in cell function. 
ii.Neurotransmitters. 
UNIT-IV 
VITAMINS:  8hours 
i.Definition, classification according to solubility 
ii.Individual vitamins - sources, coenzyme forms, functions, RDA. Digestion, absorption and 
transport, deficiency and toxicity. 
TRACE MINERALS:  
I. Individual minerals — Calcium, Phosphate, Iron, Magnesium, Fluoride, Selenium, 
Molybdenum, Copper, Zinc, Sources, RDA, Digestion, Absorption, Transport,Excretion, 
Functions, Disorders. 
ii.Phosphate, calcium and iron in detail. 
UNIT-V 
GENETICS:     7hours 
Nucleic acids — Functions of DNA and RNA, differences between DNA and RNA Genetic 
code. 
ACID - BASE BALANCE, WATER AND ELECTROLYTES: 
I. Body water, osmolarity, extra and intracellular sodium and potassium, regulation of water 
& electrolyte balance, buffers, pH., buffer systems in the blood. 
ii.Role of lungs and kidneys in acid-base balance. 
CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY  
I. Relevance of blood levels of glucose, urea, calcium, phosphates, pH, bicarbonate, enzymes, 
lipids and lipoproteins. 
ii.Urine levels of sugar, creatinine, proteins 
iii.Competitive inhibitors, clinically important enzymes. 
iv.Liver function tests. 
v.Renal function tests 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course the student should be able to understand 
1.Basic principles of metabolism and overview of important bio molecules, their regulation 
and integration. 
2.Biochemical principles of signal transduction and its role in metabolic integration. 
3.Basic principles of fluid, electrolyte and acid — base balance&Basic principles of nutrition 
including minerals. 
4.Biochemistry of muscle, connective tissue and muscle contraction. 
5.Basic molecular concepts of body defense and homeostasis.Basic biochemistry of diseases 
involving Neuro Musculo skeletal system. 
Text books: 
1.Essentials of Biochemistry — U.Satyanarayana 
Reference books: 
1.Text Book of Bio-chemistry - Ranganatha Rao 
2.Text Book of Medical Bio-chemistry - Chatterjee &Schinde 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2101                                       HEALTH AND WELLNESS                            L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       3  0  0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to help students to learn more about human health. This course helps 
to understand how current health knowledge helps to make future human beings even 
stronger and healthier. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To help understand the importance of a healthy lifestyle 
2. To familiarize students about physical and mental health 
3. To create awareness of various life style related diseases 
4. To understand the multiple dimensions of health and wellness, including physical, mental, 
emotional, social, and environmental aspects 
5. To Equip students with the knowledge and skills to develop, implement, and maintain 
healthy lifestyle practices 
 
UNIT-I                  9 Hrs 
Define and differentiate health and wellness, Importance of health and wellness, Basic 
concepts of genetics, including genes, DNA, chromosomes, and inheritance patterns. Genetic 
factors affecting macronutrient (carbohydrates, proteins, and fats) digestion. Genetic 
variations associated with micronutrient (vitamins and minerals) digestion; malnutrition, 
under nutrition and over nutrition 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Brief overview of Body systems – Skeletal system, Muscular system, Circulatory System, 
Lymphatic system, Cardiovascular system, Respiratory system, Nervous system (Central 
nervous system, Peripheral nervous system, Somatic and Autonomic nervous systems), 
Digestive system, Urinary system, Endocrine system, Reproductive system, Integumentary 
system 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Sedentary lifestyle and its risk of disease, Lifestyle Disease and its Management, Factors 
affecting mental health - Stress, anxiety, and depression, Identification of suicidal tendencies, 
Substance abuse (Drugs, Cigarette, Alcohol), de-addiction, counselling and rehabilitation. 
Four Vital signs- Pulse rate, Respiratory rate, Blood pressure, Body temperature, other 
measurements-Body mass index, Waist-Hip Ratio, Basal Metabolic Rate  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Risk factors and Pathology of the following Diseases and their Management –  - Diabetes - Hypertension - Coronary Heart Disease - Obesity - Osteoporosis 
- Osteoarthritis  - Rheumatoid-arthritis  - Cancers (Blood, Breast, Brain, Lung, Liver and Kidney) - Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) - Pain (including Low Back pain) 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Introduction to Functional Foods; Nutrients and Bioactive Compounds in Functional Foods; 
Functional Foods for Cardiovascular Health, Weight Management, Immune Function, 
Cognitive Health, Chronic Disease Prevention; Yoga and its importance in Health and 
Wellness 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon successful competition of the course the student would be able to -  
1. Understand the relationship between fitness and wellness  
2. Gain knowledge regarding various aspects and its practical implication for Wellbeing. 
3. Learn about behavior change theories and strategies for promoting healthy habits such as 
exercise, stress management, and nutrition 
4. Study techniques for setting realistic health goals, creating wellness plans, and overcoming 
barriers to maintaining a healthy lifestyle. 
5. Learn about the principles of a balanced diet, regular physical activity, mental health 
management, social relationships, and environmental factors that influence health 
 
Text Books: 
1. Physical Activity and Health by Claude Bouchard, Steven N. Blair, William L. Haskell. 
2. Mental Health Workbook by Emily Attached & Marzia Fernandez, 2021. 
3. Mental Health Workbook for Women: Exercises to Transform Negative Thoughts and 
Improve WellBeing by Nashay Lorick, 2022. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Lifestyle Diseases: Lifestyle Disease Management, by C. Nyambichu & Jeff Lumiri, 2018. 
2. Physical Activity and Mental Health by Angela Clow & Sarah Edmunds, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201                        COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT  L T P C 
                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides degree-seeking students with an array of opportunities to engage in an 
immersive community service-learning experience. It further helps to understand the 
resources, optimize the recourses in future days, and address the gaps in the communities. 
 
Course Objectives:  
Students undergoing this course are expected to:  
1. Understand community issues, needs, problems, strengths and recourses  
2. Demonstrate the ability to work with a diverse population   
3. Formulate more precise personal and professional life goals  
4. Demonstrate the ability to communicate effectively and collaborate with institutions 
and public  
5. Demonstrate the ability to take initiative, follow directions, lead, and solve problems  
UNIT-I Social Structure                                                                                   5 Hrs  
Concept of Society; Community; Association and Institution; Individual and Society; Social 
Groups- Meaning, Characteristics and Classification; Social Process; Social Change; 
Structure and Characteristics of urban, rural and tribal communities.  
UNIT-II Social Organisation and Disorganisation                                          5 Hrs  
 Social Organisation- meaning, elements and types; Voluntary Associations; Social System- 
definition, types and roles; Social Control- meaning, aims and process of social control; 
Social norms, morals and values; Social Disorganisation- definition, causes, control and 
planning.  
UNIT-III Social Problems and Welfare State                                                  8 Hrs  
Social Problems- Poverty, Housing, food supply, illiteracy, Prostitution, dowry, child labour, 
child abuse, delinquency, crime, substance abuse, HIV/ AIDS, Covid-19; Venerable Group- 
elderly, handicapped, minority and another marginal group; Fundamental rights of individual, 
women and children, NITI Aayog, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of 
Rural Development, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, and 
Role of Local Bodies for transformation; Corporate Social Responsibility; Social Work.  
Proposed Field activities: Field visit- Interaction with Local Self Government, Visit of Gram 
Panchayat & Staff, Socio-Economic Survey (5 hours/ one day). 
UNIT-IV Communication Strategies and Community Engagement                    18 Hrs  
Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC); Focused Group Discussion; SWOT 
analysis; Participatory Learning Action.   
Proposed Field activities: Meeting, Mobilizing, Transect Walk, Identification of Natural 
Leaders, Timeline, Mapping, Case Study, Documentation; Outreach- Special Camp Viz., 
Health Education, Medical Camp, Environment Protection, Sustainability, Technology & 
Innovation, Nutrition, Swachh Bharat (15 Hours/ 4 days).  
 
 
 
UNIT-V Sustainable Development Goals 2023                                             9 Hrs  
Millennium Development Goals; Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 2030- 17 Goals; 
SDG Pyramid; Localizing SDGs; Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP).  
Proposed Field activities: Mapping the activities with SDG 2030 (6 Hours/ 1 day).  
Course Outcomes:   
By the end of the course, students should able to:  
1. Understand and apply the concept related to community and social structure.  
2. Develop the ability to involve and work with the social system.  
3. Understand various social problems emerging in society and solve them.  
4. Apply SBCC tools and SWOT analysis.   
5. Appreciate Sustainable Development Goals and contribute beyond SDG 2030.  
Text Books:  
1. Krishna Kant Singh & Ram Shankar Singh, (2011), Social Work and Community 
Development. 
2. Makara Rumley, (2020), Modern-Day Strategies for Community Engagement: How 
to Effectively Build Bridges Between People and the Bottom Line. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Hall, B. L., Tandon, R. & Tremblay, C. (2015). Strengthening Community University Research 
Partnerships: Global Perspectives.  
2. http://unescochaircbrsr.org/unesco/pdf/UNESCO%20Book%20Web_with%20BookCovers_A
ug202015_FINAL.pdf 
3. GUNi (Ed.). (2014). Knowledge, Engagement and Higher Education: Contributing to Social 
Change (Higher Education in the World 5). Hampshire (UK)/New York (USA): Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
4. UNESCO Chair in Community Based Research & Social Responsibility in Higher Education 
(2015). Institutionalizing Community University Research Partnerships: A User’s Manual.  
http://unescochair-cbrsr.org/unesco/pdf/CURP_Guidelines.pdf 
5. Vallaeys, F. (2014). University Social Responsibility: A Mature and Responsible Definition. In 
GUNi (Ed.), Knowledge, Engagement and Higher Education: Contributing to Social Change 
(Higher Education in the World 5) (pp. 88-96). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2202                              CLINICAL NUTRITION                                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
Upon completion of the course, students will be prepared to apply their knowledge of clinical 
nutrition to promote health and manage diseases effectively, contributing to multidisciplinary 
healthcare teams. This course is essential for healthcare professionals, nutritionists, dietitians, 
and anyone interested in understanding the role of nutrition in clinical care and wellness 
promotion. 
 
Course Objectives:  
To enable the students to: 
1. Develop proficiency in conducting comprehensive nutritional assessments using various 
methods such as dietary recall, biochemical tests, and anthropometric measurements. 
2. Understand the impact of diet on the prevention, management, and progression of chronic 
diseases commonly encountered in clinical practice, including diabetes, cardiovascular 
diseases, and obesity. 
3. Acquire skills in designing individualized nutrition plans tailored to specific patient needs and 
health conditions across different life stages (e.g., pediatric, geriatric, maternal). 
4. Evaluate ethical issues related to nutritional counseling, respecting cultural dietary practices, 
and providing evidence-based dietary recommendations within clinical settings. 
5. Critically appraise current research and controversies in clinical nutrition, integrating 
evidence-based guidelines into decision-making processes to optimize patient outcomes. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs                                   
Introduction to nutrition - Food as source of nutrients, functions of food, definition of 
nutrition, nutrients & energy, adequate, optimum & good nutrition, malnutrition, Effect of 
cooking & heat processing on the nutritive value of foods, role of nutrition in prior 
pregnancy, during pregnancy, during lactation, in adolescence, Fitness, Athletics & Sports 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Food guide - Basic five food groups How to use food guide (according to R.D.A.)  
Interrelationship between nutrition & health: - Visible symptoms of good health, Use of food 
in body - Digestion, Absorption, transport & utilization, Role of fibres in human nutrition. 
malnutrition, Protein energy malnutrition.  
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Biomolecules as a nutrient: Carbohydrates: Functions, classification, food sources, storage 
in body. Fats & oils: composition, saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, classification, food 
sources, function of fats. Proteins - composition, sources, essential & non-essential amino 
acids, functions, Protein deficiency.  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Water minerals and Vitamins: Water - as a nutrient, function, sources, requirement, water 
balance & effect of deficiency.  Minerals - macro & micronutrients. - Functions, sources. 
Bioavailability and deficiency of Calcium, Iron, Iodine, Sodium & Potassium, Vitamins 
(water & fat soluble) - definition, classification & functions.  
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Role of nutrients in disease management: Importance of nutrition in kidney and liver 
diseases with respect to their nutritional value. Case study- diabetes, cancer, Osteoporosis, 
Heart related diseases, role of Antioxidants as a nutrient in disease control. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, the student shall be able to  
1. Demonstrate proficiency in conducting thorough nutritional assessments using a variety of 
methods, interpreting results, and applying findings to develop dietary recommendations. 
2. Apply knowledge of macro and micronutrients, dietary supplements, and hydration to 
design effective nutrition plans for individuals with diverse health needs and conditions. 
3. Implement dietary interventions that contribute to the prevention, management, and 
improvement of chronic diseases, integrating nutritional strategies into comprehensive 
healthcare plans. 
4. Evaluate and address ethical considerations in nutritional counseling, respecting cultural 
diversity and individual preferences while adhering to professional standards and evidence
based practices. 
5. Critically analyze current research literature in clinical nutrition, utilizing evidence-based 
guidelines to make informed decisions and enhance patient outcomes in clinical settings. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Kathleen ML and Escott S. Krause's Food, Nutrition and Diet Therapy, 9thedn, W.B. 
Saunders Company Pennsylvania, 2000. 
2. Davidson S, Passmore R, Breck JFT. Human Nutrition and Dietetics, The English Language 
Book Society and Churchill Livingston, 1975. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Thomas B. Manual of Dietetic Practice. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, London, 
1988. 
2. Robinson CH. Normal and Therapeutic Nutrition. Oxford Publishing Co, Bombay, 1972. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2203      EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND MENTAL HEALTH L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course will explore the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health. 
Students will learn about the importance of emotional intelligence in promoting positive 
mental health, and will develop skills in recognizing and regulating emotions, managing 
stress, and building resilience. The course will cover topics such as emotional intelligence 
theories, emotional regulation strategies, mindfulness, self-compassion, and the impact of 
emotions on mental health. 
Course Objectives: 
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand the role of emotional intelligence in mental health 
2. Develop skills in recognizing and regulating emotions 
3. Understand the impact of stress on mental health and develop strategies for managing 
stress 
4. Understand the importance of self-compassion in promoting positive mental health 
5. Develop critical thinking and analytical skills in relation to emotional intelligence and mental 
health 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Introduction to Emotional Intelligence and Mental Health; Definition and history of 
emotional intelligence, the role of emotional intelligence in mental health, Professional 
organizations and ethical codes related to emotional intelligence 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Theoretical Perspectives on Emotional Intelligence; Ability model of emotional intelligence, 
Trait model of emotional intelligence, Mixed model of emotional intelligence, Mindfulness 
and Mental Health, Mindfulness and Mental Health. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Stress and Mental Health, Resilience and Mental Health; The impact of stress on mental 
health, Stress management techniques (e.g., relaxation techniques, time management, 
exercise) Definition and benefits of resilience, Factors that contribute to resilience,Building 
resilience in oneself and others. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Self-Compassion and Mental Health, Emotions and Relationships; Definition and benefits of 
self-compassion, Practice of self-compassion, Relationship between self-compassion and 
mental health,Emotions and Relationships 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Emotional Intelligence in the Workplace, Ethics and Emotional Intelligence; Emotional 
intelligence and job performance, the role of emotional intelligence in leadership, Emotional 
intelligence training in the workplace, Ethical issues related to emotional intelligence, 
Professional codes and standards related to emotional intelligence 
 
Final Project Presentations 
Students will present their final projects, which may include research papers, case studies, or 
other projects related to emotional intelligence and mental health. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Able to provide an overview of emotional intelligence and mental health 
2. Will understand the importance of emotional intelligence  
3. The impact of stress on mental health, Stress management techniques 
4. Relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health 
5. Understand the importance of Emotional Intelligence in the workplace.  
Text Books: 
1. Neff, K. (2011). Self-compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind. 
HarperCollins. 
2. Goleman, D. (2007). Emotional Intelligence (10th ed.). Bantam Books. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Covey, Stephen R., author. (2020). The 7 habits of highly effective people: powerful 
 lessons in personal change. New York :Simon& Schuster. 
2. Tolle, E. (2016). The power of now: A guide to spiritual enlightenment. Yellow Kite. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2204                                               HUMAN RIGHTS   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                   3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course offers a comprehensive introduction to the field of human rights, exploring the 
historical development, philosophical foundations, and contemporary issues surrounding the 
protection and promotion of human rights globally. Students will engage with key concepts, 
major international human rights instruments, and the roles of various actors in the human 
rights landscape.  
 
Course Objectives: 
This course is intended to prepare the students to  
1. Know Human Rights, its need importance, and kind of rights 
2. Understand the Human Rights of vulnerable groups 
3. Identify and analyze key international human rights documents and treaties. 
4. Know about the institutions enforcing the Human Rights 
5. Understandthe violations of Human Rights and the safeguards available to citizens. 
UNIT-I Concept of Human Rights – Indian and International Perspectives      5 Hrs
  a. Evolution of Human Rights 
b. Definitions under Indian and International documents 
 
UNIT-II Broad classification of Human Rights and Relevant Constitutional Provisions. - 
                  11 Hrs 
a. Right to Life, Liberty and Dignity  b. Right to Equality 
c. Right against Exploitation   d. Cultural and Educational Rights 
e. Economic Rights    f. Political Rights 
g. Social Rights 
 
UNIT-IIIHuman Rights of Women and Children                     11 Hrs 
a) Social Practice and Constitutional Safeguards 
b) Female Foeticide and Infanticide 
c) Physical assault and harassment 
d) Domestic violence 
e) Conditions of Working Women 
 
UNIT-IV Institutions for Implementation              9 Hrs 
a. Human Rights Commission 
b. Judiciary 
 
UNIT-V Violations and Redressal               9 Hrs 
a. Violation by State 
b. Violation by Individuals 
c. nuclear weapons, bio war and terrorism 
d. Safeguards. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
 After the successful completion of this course the students will be able to  
1. Know about Human Rights, its need importance and kind of rights 
2. Understand the Human Rights of vulnerable groups 
3. Know about the institutions enforcing the Human Rights 
4. Understand the violations of Human Rights and the safeguards available to citizens. 
5. Develop critical thinking and analytical skills by examining case studies and current events. 
Text Books: 
1. Human Rights in India: Historical, Social and Political Perspectives (Law in India) Hardcover – 
Illustrated by Chiranjivi J. Nirmal (Author) 
2. History of Human Rights, Narrated by Andrea Giordani 
Reference Books: 
1. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights- UNO publication 
2. Making Sense of Human Rights- by James Nickel. 
3. The Idea of Natural Rights- by Brian Tierney. 
4. The Law of Peoples- by John Rawls. 
5. On Human Rights. - by James Griffin. 
6. Human Rights: Contemporary Issues by V.K. Ahuja 
7. Human Rights, M Girija, S Chand Edu tech Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2205                                                INDUSTRY 4.0                              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Industry 4.0 aims to the “smart” and connected production systems that are designed to 
sense, predict, and interact with the physical world, so as to make decisions that support 
production in real-time. In manufacturing, it can increase productivity, energy efficiency, and 
sustainability. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students: 
1. To impart basic idea in Industry 4.0.  
2. To provide students with good depth of knowledge of designing Industrial 4.0 Systems 
for various application.  
3. To learn the artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques/ tools in health care. 
4.  To understand the bigdata technology and its applications in health care. 
5. To learn the design and analysis of Industry 4.0 systems for healthcare applications. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Introduction: Introduction, Historical Context, General framework, Application areas, 
Dissemination of Industry 4.0 and the disciplines that contribute to its development, Artificial 
intelligence, The Internet of Things and Industrial Internet of Things, Additive 
manufacturing, Robotization and automation, Current situation of Industry 4.0.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Cyber Physical System:Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), Architecture of 
CPS- Components, Data science and technology for CPS, Emerging applications in CPS in 
different fields. Case study: Application of CPS in health care domain. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning:Artificial Intelligence: Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) – What & Why? History of AI- Foundations of AI, the AI Environment, Application 
Domains and Tools. 
Machine Learning- Introduction–Definition–Types of Machine Learning–Supervised, 
Unsupervised, Reinforcement Learning–Algorithms for Machine Learning–Problems solved 
by Machine Learning-Applications areas of Machine Learning in Health care. 
  
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Big Data & Cloud Computing:What is Big Data, Evolution of Big Data, sources of Big 
Data? Characteristics of Big Data Vs – Big Data Myths- Data Discovery-Traditional 
Approach, Big Data Technology: Big Data Technology Process– Applications of Bigdata in 
Healthcare. 
Cloud Computing: Need– Definition – Types of Cloud-Types of Services– SaaS, PaaS, Iaas  
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Impact of Industry 4.0 on Healthcare Industry:An introduction Discover how Industry 4.0 
is impacting and transforming the Healthcare Industry including self-diagnosis systems for 
patients, real-time diagnosis, 3D printed organs and Internet-of-Medical Things (IOMT).  
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, student will be able to:  
1. Understand the basic concepts of Industry 4.0 and the other related fields 
2. Analyze, design and develop systems to solve the Engineering problems by integrating 
thermal, design and manufacturing Domains.  
3. Understand the various artificial intelligence and machine learning tools in health care 
domain.  
4. Apply bigdata technology in health care applications. 
5. Apply the learned Engineering knowledge for the Development of society and self. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Jean-Claude André, ―Industry 4.0, Wiley- ISTE, July 2019, ISBN: 781786304827, 2019. 
2. Diego Galar Pascual, Pasquale Daponte, Uday Kumar, ―Handbook of Industry 4.0 and SMART 
Systems, Taylor and Francis,2020  
 
Reference Books: 
1. P. Kaliraj, T. Devi, BigDataApplicationsinIndustry4.0, 2022, ISBN9781032008110, CRC Press, 
Taylor & Francis Group 
2. P. Kaliraj, Devi Thirupathi, “Artificial Intelligence Theory, Models and Applications”, Auerbach 
Publications, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis group, 2021. 
3. EthemAlpaydin, “Introduction to Machine Learning”, Third Edition, MIT Press, 2014. 
4. P. Kaliraj, T. Devi, Industry 4.0 and Education: Transformative Technology and Applications, 
2022, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2206                          MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY                             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The purpose of this course is to develop a student’s understanding and use of hospital and 
medical terminology. There is a focus on understanding the terns commonly used to identify 
the cause and effects of disease conditions. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the associate medical terms with specific body systems. 
2. To identify and interpret diagnostic and symptomatic terms related to the diseases specific to 
each body system. 
3. To describe designated diagnostic testing procedures (laboratory, x-ray, surgical, pharmacy, 
etc.). 
4. To Enable students to understand, use, and correctly pronounce a wide range of medical terms. 
5. To Prepare students to effectively communicate with healthcare professionals and patients 
using accurate medical terminology. 
 
UNIT-I                             9 Hrs 
Basics of medical terminology, Specialties in a Hospital, The Human body in health and 
disease 
 
UNIT-II                            9 Hrs 
The Skeletal System, The Muscular System, The lymphatic and immune systems 
 
UNIT-III                             9 Hrs 
The Respiratory System, The Circulatory System, The Digestive System, The Urinary 
System  
 
UNIT-IV                           9 Hrs 
The Nervous system, Special senses - Eyes and Ears, Skin - The Integumentary system 
 
UNIT-V                           9 Hrs 
The Endocrine system, The Reproductive System, Diagnostic procedures, Nuclear Medicine 
and Pharmacology 
 
Course Outcomes:  
Upon successful completion of the course student would be –  
1. Able to Identify and interpret complex medical terms by breaking them into their 
component word parts in order to decipher their meaning. 
2. Able to understand common diseases and disorders of the body systems 
3. Able to identify diagnostic tools and techniques for the common diseases and disorders 
of the human body  
4. Able to interpret medical records, lab reports, and other documentation to ensure clear 
and precise communication within healthcare teams and with patients 
5. Able to learn the roots, prefixes, and suffixes that form medical terms, as well as the 
terminology related to various body systems, diseases, procedures, and treatments. 
Students will be able to deconstruct complex terms into their component parts to 
understand their meanings. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Medical Terminology for Health Professions, 7th Edition by Ann Ehrlich; Carol L Schroeder, 
ISBN 13: 9781111543297, Published by Delmar Cengage Learning (2013) 
2. Workbook for Ehrlich/Schroeder's Medical Terminology for Health Professions, 7th by Carol 
Schroeder, Ann Ehrlich Published by Delmar Cengage Learning; 7th edition, 2012, ISBN-13  :  
978-1111543280  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Quick and Easy Medical Terminology - With Access by Peggy C. Leonard, ISBN13: 978
0323595995, 9th Edition 
2. Medical Terminology Systems: A Body Systems Approach - With Access by Barbara A. Gylys, 
ISBN13: 978-0803658677, 8th Edition 
3. Understanding Medical Terminology by Agnes C. Frenay, ISBN13: 978-0697140586, 9th 
Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2207                             SOCIAL NETWORK ANALYSIS                             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
A thorough introduction to Social Network Analysis (SNA), an interdisciplinary topic that 
studies the connections and interactions between people, groups, and things in various social 
contexts, is provided in this course. Students will receive a broad understanding of the core 
ideas, approaches and uses of SNA in a variety of disciplines. The course will cover data 
gathering methods, network visualization, fundamental network metrics, sophisticated 
network ideas and practical SNA implementations. Students will learn the skills necessary to 
evaluate social networks and gain useful insights from intricate network data through hands
on exercises. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To introduce students to the foundational concepts and historical background of Social 
Network Analysis (SNA). 
2. To familiarize students with the basic building blocks of social networks, including nodes and 
edges and different types of social networks (e.g., online, offline, professional, friendship). 
3. To provide students with an understanding of key network measures such as degree 
centrality, betweenness centrality, clustering coefficients and network density. 
4. To demonstrate real-world applications of SNA, such as social network mining, influence and 
opinion dynamics, social network marketing and cybersecurity. 
5. To equip students with practical skills for analyzing and interpreting social network data. 
 
UNIT-I                             9 Hrs 
Overview of Social Network Analysis: Definition, history and key concepts. Nodes and 
Edges: Understanding the basic building blocks of social networks. Types of Social 
Networks: Exploring different types of social networks (e.g., online, offline, professional, 
friendship).Importance and Applications of SNA: How SNA is used in various fields (e.g., 
Engineering, Sociology, Psychology, Marketing and Business). 
 
UNIT-II                  9 Hrs 
Data Collection Methods: Techniques for gathering social network data (e.g., surveys, 
interviews, online platforms). Data Representation: Different formats for representing 
network data (e.g., adjacency matrix, edge list).Network Visualization: Introduction to 
visualization tools fornd interpreting network structures. 
 
UNIT-III                  9 Hrs 
Degree Centrality: Identifying influential nodes based on their connections. Betweenness 
Centrality: Understanding nodes that act as bridges in the network. Clustering Coefficients: 
Analyzing the degree of interconnectedness within local neighbourhoods. Network Density: 
Assessing the overall connectivity of a social network. 
 
UNIT-IV                  9 Hrs 
Small World Phenomenon: Exploring the "six degrees of separation" concept. Homophily 
and Social Influence: Understanding how social networks shape individuals' behaviour and 
beliefs. Network Resilience and Robustness: Examining the impact of node removal on the 
network's stability. Network Motifs: Identifying recurring patterns in complex social 
networks. 
 
UNIT-V                  9 Hrs 
Social Network Mining: Using SNA to extract meaningful patterns and insights from large
scale networks. Influence and Opinion Dynamics: Analyzing how information spreads 
through social networks. Social Network Marketing: Leveraging SNA for targeted marketing 
campaigns and product promotion. Online Social Networks and Cyber security: 
Understanding network-based threats and vulnerabilities. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Comprehend the foundational concepts, methodologies and tools of Social Network 
Analysis. 
2. Extract meaningful insights from social network data, identifying influential nodes and 
understanding network dynamics. 
3. Apply SNA concepts to real-world challenges in areas such as marketing, cyber security and 
social dynamics. 
4. Utilize SNA techniques to inform decision-making processes. 
5. Conduct and interpret SNA in various domains effectively. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications" by S. K. Garg, 2019, Wiley India. 
2. Introduction to Social Network Analysis: Concepts, Methods and Applications" by R. K. Singh, 
2020, Springer India. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications" by Stanley Wasserman, Katherine Faust 
(1994, Cambridge University Press) 
2. Analyzing Social Networks" by Stephen P. Borgatti, Martin G. Everett, Jeffrey C. Johnson 
(2013, SAGE Publications) 
3. Networks, Crowds and Markets: Reasoning About a Highly Connected World" by David 
Easley, Jon Kleinberg (2010, Cambridge University Press). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT220 ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE &BIOMEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMEN L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course covers antibiotics and drug resistance, including mechanisms and trends, and 
explores biomedical waste management, focusing on segregation, treatment, and disposal. 
Emphasis is placed on antimicrobial stewardship and modern technologies for handling 
biomedical waste and ensuring environmental safety. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand the history, mechanisms, and types of antibiotic resistance. 
2. Analyze trends in drug resistance and actions to combat it. 
3. Evaluate the consequences of antibiotic resistance and implement antimicrobial 
stewardship. 
4. Learn principles and practices of biomedical waste management and environmental safety. 
5. Utilize modern technologies and personal protective equipment for effective biomedical 
waste handling. 
 
UNIT-I                               9 Hrs 
Antibiotics: Antibiotic Resistance, History of antibiotics, How resistance happens and 
spreads, Types of resistance- intrinsic, acquired, passive.   
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Drug resistance - I: Trends in drug resistance, Actions to fight resistance, Bacterial 
persistence, Antibiotic sensitivity   
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Drug resistance - II: Consequences of antibiotic resistance, Antimicrobial Stewardship – 
Barriers and opportunities, tools and models in hospitals.    
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Biomedical waste management and environmental safety  - I: Definition of Biomedical, 
Waste, Waste minimization, BMW – Segregation, collection, transportation, treatment and 
disposal (including colour coding).   
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Biomedical waste management and environmental safety- II: Liquid BMW, Radioactive 
waste, Metals / Chemicals / Drug waste, BMW Management & methods of disinfection, 
Modern Technology for Handling BMW, Use of Personal protective equipment (PPE), 
Monitoring & controlling cross-infection (Protective devices).   
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Explain antibiotic resistance, its history, and mechanisms. 
2. Analyse trends and strategies in drug resistance management. 
3. Assess the consequences of antibiotic resistance and implement antimicrobial stewardship. 
4. Understand principles and practices of biomedical waste management. 
5. Apply modern technologies and PPE for effective biomedical waste handling and infection 
control. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Antibiotics: Actions, Origins, Resistance" by Christopher Walsh 
2. "Antimicrobial Stewardship: Principles and Practice" by Matthew Laundy, Lynda A. Sisson, 
and Matthew Dryden. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Biomedical Waste Management in Hospitals: A Manual for Health Professionals" by Sushrut 
S. N. H.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2209                    BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION                   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to the fundamentals of behavioral theory, research and 
interventions in health education and promotion. The course will expose students to a wide 
range of theories, basic statistics and the use of open-source software in the analysis and 
evaluation of health aspects at the community level in a holistic manner. Furthermore, 
students will understand the concept of intersectoral and multidisciplinary coordination in 
order to improve data visualization in health education and promotion through the use of 
appropriate statistical tools. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the behavioral, social and cultural factors associated with health and illness. 
2. To explore factors that influence and barriers to practicing health behavior and changing 
poor health habits across age groups. 
3. To understand the structure of society, the role of society and various types of 
communication and identify the role of society, community, health education and 
communication in health. 
4. To describe the methods, models, tools and processes used in understanding health 
behavior change, health education and promotion. 
5. To apply relevant social and behavioral theories to diagnose and understand individual, 
social network, organizational, community and policymaker behaviors associated with the 
planning, implementation, evaluation and maintenance of community-based primary health 
care programs. 
 
UNIT-I                             5 Hrs 
Introduction to Social and Health Behavioral Health, Importance of social and behavioral 
factors in health, Historical perspectives on population and diseases.  
 
UNIT-II                  8 Hrs 
Health behavior: role of behavior factors in disease and disorders, Health behavior, health 
habits, Illness behavior, Practicing and changing health behavior, Barrier to modify poor 
health behavior, intervening with children, adolescents, adults and at risk, social determinants 
of Health, Changing health habits.  
 
UNIT-III               12 Hrs 
Basic concepts of society, community, and family, Society: features and types, Concept of 
culture: characteristics, elements, variability, social institutions: marriage and family. 
Working with communities, Community: Definition, concept of community participation, 
Benefits of community participation, Health communication, Communication: Definition, 
scope and requirements, Types of communication, Components of communication, 
Communication stages, Common communication approach, Methods of communication, 
Characteristics of effective communication, Barriers of effective communication. 
 
 
 
 
UNIT-IV             10 Hrs 
Health Behavior Models, Social Epidemiology, Health belief model, Theory of planned 
behavior, Transtheoretical Model and change process, Social network theory, Diffusion of 
innovation, Social reaction to diseases, Comparative health cultures, Health disparities. 
 
UNIT-V               10 Hrs 
Introduction Social network analysis, Basic of social network analysis, Introduction to open
source software and classification in health approaches,Introduction to Node XL software, 
Install, data visualize, data analysis and application among community level for policy-maker 
behaviors associated with the planning, implementation, evaluation, and maintenance of 
community-based health programs. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
End of the course completion student would be  
1. Understand behavioral, social and cultural factors associated with health and illness. 
2. Develop strategies to address barriers to practicing healthy behaviors and changing poor 
health habits across age groups. 
3. Analyze the structure of society and various types of communication and identify the role of 
society, community, health education and communication in health. 
4. Apply appropriate methods, models, tools and processes for understanding health behavior 
change, health education and promotion. 
5. Utilize SNA tools, strategies and social and behavioral theories to diagnose and understand 
individual, social network, organizational, community and policymaker behaviors in 
community-based primary health care programs. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Essentials of health behavior: Social and behavioral theory in 
publichealthbyMarkEdberg(JonesandBartlettpublishers 
2. Mahajan BK. Methods in Bio-statistics. Jaypee Brothers, Medical Publishers (p) Ltd., G16, 
EMCA House, 23/23B, Ansari Road, Daryaganj, Post Box: 7193, New Delhi 110 002, India, 
1991. List Current Essential Reference 
 
Reference Books: 
1. FosterandAnderson:MedicalAnthropology,Wiley,NewYork 
2. Anderson & Taylor, Sociology: Understanding a DiverseSociety. 
3. Neubeck and Glasberg, Selected Material from Sociology: Diversity, Conflict, 
andChange. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201A                         DISABILITY MANAGEMENT                             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
Disability Management course is designed to provide students with an in-depth understanding 
of the strategies, practices, and policies essential for supporting individuals with disabilities 
in various settings. This course covers the principles and techniques of disability 
management, focusing on creating inclusive environments in the workplace, educational 
institutions, and the community.     
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the social, medical, and legal aspects of disability. 
2. Evaluate the impact of disability on individuals and society. 
3. Analyze policies and regulations related to disability management. 
4. Develop strategies for supporting individuals with disabilities in various contexts. 
5. Promote inclusivity and diversity in the workplace and community. 
UNIT-I Introduction to Disability Management                                                            9 Hrs 
Definition and classification of disabilities, Historical perspectives on disability, Disability as 
a social construct, Medical aspects of Disability, Common medical conditions leading to 
disability, Assessing functional limitations and impairments 
UNIT-II Social and Psychological Aspects of Disability                                               9 Hrs 
The impact of disability on quality of life, Stigma and discrimination, Coping and 
psychological adjustment to disability, Role of healthcare professionals in disability 
management, Psychological Interventions and Chronic Health Disorders; Therapies, 
Pharmacological Interventions, Individual Therapy, Relaxation, Stress Management and 
exercise, Social Support Interventions, Help on the Internet, Support Groups  
UNIT-III Legal and Ethical Framework                                                                        9 Hrs 
Disability rights and legislation, Equal opportunity and anti-discrimination laws, Ethical 
considerations in disability management, Emerging technologies and their impact on 
disability management, the future of disability policy and practice 
UNIT-IV Workplace Disability Management                                                                9 Hrs 
Reasonable accommodation and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Return-to-work 
programs Workplace diversity and inclusion, Current Issues  
UNIT-V Community and Public Health Approach                                                       9 Hrs 
Community resources and services for individuals with disabilities, Accessibility and 
universal design Disability awareness and advocacy, Analysis of real-life cases in disability 
management, Developing disability management plans, Accommodation strategies and their 
implementation,  Current Issues and Future Trends 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course, the students would be able to; 
1. Understand various aspects and causes of disability. 
2. Get insight on the efficacy of interventions and therapies to deal disability.  
3. Assess the ethical and legal consideration of disability. 
4. Acknowledge the importance of ADA act and it implementation in workplace. 
5. Know and participate in various community based disability programs. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Preventing chronic disease: a vital investment. WHO global report. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2005 (http://www.who.int/chp/chronic_disease_ report/en, accessed 15 May 
2008).  
2. Singh D. Transforming chronic care: evidence about improving care for people with long
term conditions. Birmingham, University of Birmingham, 2005.  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Chronic diseases [web site]. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 
(http://www.who.int/topics/chronic_disease/en, accessed 15 May 2008). 
2. National Center for Health Statistics definitions: health condition [web site]. Atlanta, 
UnitedStates Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201B                           DISASTER MANAGEMENT                                   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                        3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Disaster Management course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive 
understanding of the principles, strategies, and practices essential for effectively managing 
disasters. This course explores the various types of natural and human-made disasters, their 
causes, impacts, and the processes involved in mitigating, preparing for, responding to, and 
recovering from such events. 
 
CourseObjectives: 
The main objectives of this course are to: 
1. Toimpartknowledgeandconceptsofdisaster,disastermanagementanddisasterrisk 
reduction. 
2. ToenhancethestudentsunderstandingonHazardVulnerabilityandRiskAnalysis 
3. Todevelop positiveattitudetowards practical response todifferent stages of disaster  
4. To management by adopting advance technology and sustainable development. 
5. Toensuredisasterresponseskillsinassessment,analysis,interventionandevaluation inthe 
Practice of reducing disaster risk. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
ConceptsofDisasterandVulnerability                                                                                          - Hazardsanddisasters-Concepts,vulnerabilityandrisks - Hazardanddisastertype-Natural,Water
related,PandemicandHumaninducedhazardsanddisasters - Causes and impacts of disasters- Impact onnatural eco-system;physical,psychological 
andsocial impact - Disasterandfinancialresilience - GISandRemoteSensing 
DisastervulnerabilityprofileofIndia-Specifictogeographicalregionsandstates(asper 
regional significance). 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
DisastersInterventionPractices - DisasterManagementCycle
Rescue,relief,rehabilitation,reconstruction,prevention,mitigationand preparedness - Disasterriskreduction(ORR)- 
communitybasedORR,Institutionsconcernedwithsafety,Disaster mitigation and 
construction techniques as per Indian Standard - Earlywarningsystems - TraumaandStressmanagement - First-aidandemergency procedures 
Awarenessgenerationstrategiesforthecommunityonsafepracticesindisaster(asperregio
nal significance) 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
DisasterManagement 
Componentsofdisastersmanagement-Preparednessofrescue&relief,mitigation, 
rehabilitation & reconstruction 
InstitutionalframeworkofdisastermanagementinIndia(NDMA-SDMA
DDMA,NDRF,Civic volunteers, NIDM), 
Phasesofdisasters/riskmanagementandpost-disasterresponses 
Compensationandinsurance 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                               9 Hrs 
Applicationsofremotesensing&GISindisastermanagement - Capacitybuildingfordisaster/damagemitigation(structuralandnon
structuralmeasures). - DisasterriskreductionstrategiesandNationalDisasterManagementGuidelines - DisasterManagementAct-2005 - Regionalissuesasperregionalrequirement/ 
universitycantakeminimumtwotopicsasper High Powered Committee. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                       9 Hrs 
Practicalexposurerequirements:Fieldwork/communityvisitandVulnerabilityMapping,S
afecommunityplanningandimplementation,MockDrill/Regionalissuesasperregion/uni
versity 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completionofthiscourse,thestudentwillbeableto: 
1. Defineandanalysisfactorscontributingtodisasters,threatstodevelopment,lifeandnature 
2. Demonstrate,andpracticedisasterriskreductionactivitiestowardssustainabledevelopment 
3. Formulate,organize and assessdisasterriskreduction 
4. Plan activitiesaccordingto the nature of disasters and factors of vulnerabilities 
5. Able to mitigate disaster and educate communities 
 
ModeofEvaluation:ContinuousAssessmentTest,Quizzes,Assignments,Multiplechoicequ
estionstest,fieldworkreport,projectreport. 
 
Text Books: 
1. “Disaster Management” by Harsh K. Gupta 
2. “Disaster Management: Future Challenges and Opportunities” by Jagbir Singh 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Singh, R. (2017), "Disaster Management Guidelines for Earthquakes, Landslides, 
Avalanches and Tsunami". Horizon Press Publications 
2. Taimpo (2016), "Disaster Management and Preparedness" CRC Press 
Publications 
3. Nidhi, G.D. (2014), "Disaster Management Preparedness". CBS Publications Pvt. 
Ltd. 
4. Gupta, A. K., Nair, S.S., Shiraz, A. and Dey, S.(2013), "Flood Disaster Risk 
Management- CBS Publications Pvt. Ltd. 
5. Singh, R. (2016), "Disaster Management Guidelines for Natural Disasters" Oxford 
University Press Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201C                  HUMAN VALUES& PROFESSIONAL ETHICS            L T P C 
                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Human Values and Professional Ethics course aims to explore the fundamental principles 
that underpin ethical behavior and moral reasoning. This course provides students with an 
understanding of core human values and ethical frameworks, fostering the development of 
personal integrity, social responsibility, and professional ethics. Through this course, students 
will engage with key philosophical theories, contemporary ethical issues, and the application 
of ethical principles in various contexts. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the need, guidelines, content, and process for Value Education. 
2.  Understand the concept of harmony within oneself. 
3. Understand the values in human relationships. 
4. Understand the interconnectedness and mutual fulfillment among the four orders of nature. 
5. Understand the implications of a holistic understanding of harmony on professional ethics. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Introduction – Need, guidelines, content and process for Value Education Value 
Education 
 Understanding the need, basic guidelines, content and process for Value Education 
 Self-exploration what is it? Its content and process; “Natural acceptance” and Experiential 
Validation as the mechanism for self-exploration. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Understanding harmony in the human being- Harmony in myself! 
 Understanding human being as a coexistence of the sentient I and the material body 
 Understanding the harmony of I with the body: Sanyam and Swasthya; correct appraisal of 
physical needs, meaning of prosperity in detail. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Understanding harmony in the Family and Society- Harmony in Human relationship 
 Understanding values in human – 
 Human relationship; meaning of Nyaya and program for its fulfillment to ensure Ubhay- 
trupti; Trust (Vishwas) and Respect (Samman) as the foundational values of relationship 
 Visualizing a universal harmonious order in society-Undivided Society (AkhandSamaj), 
Universal Order (SarvabhaumVyawastha) from family to world family. 
 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                         9 Hrs 
Understanding Harmony in Nature; Coexistence 
 Interconnectedness and mutual fulfillment among the four orders of nature- recyclability 
and self-regulation in nature. 
 Holistic perception of harmony at all levels of existence. 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Implications of the above Holistic understanding of harmony on professional ethics 
 Definitiveness of Ethical Human Conduct 
 Basis for Humanistic Education, Humanistic Constitution and Humanistic Universal Order 
 Competence in professional ethics 
 Ability to utilize the professional competence for augmenting universal human order 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of this course, the learners will be able to:  
1. Students will be able to explain the need, guidelines, content, and process for Value 
Education. 
2. Students will demonstrate an understanding of the harmony within oneself, identifying the 
sentient self and the material body. 
3. They will be capable of visualizing and explaining the concept of a universal harmonious 
order from the family level to the global level. 
4. They will recognize and explain the importance of recyclability and self-regulation in nature, 
and develop a holistic view of harmony at all levels of existence. 
5. They will be able to define and advocate for ethical human conduct in their professional 
lives. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Value Education and Professional Ethics"** by R.S. Naagarazan 
2. "Human Values and Professional Ethics"** by Rishabh Anand 
Reference Books: 
1. Mind and Body: Holistic Approach"byDr. V.K. Sharma 
2. "Integrative Body-Mind Training"** by Yi-Yuan Tang 
3. Understanding Harmony in the Family and Society 
4. "Human Values and Professional Ethics"** by Jayashree Suresh 
5. "Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research"** by Caroline Whitbeck 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201D       INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course covers infection control principles, antibiotic resistance, and antimicrobial 
stewardship. Students will learn about sterilization, disinfection, hand hygiene, PPE, and 
managing drug resistance in healthcare settings. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand evidence-based infection control practices. 
2. Learn prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections. 
3. Analyse the history and mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. 
4. Examine trends and actions to combat drug resistance. 
5. Implement antimicrobial stewardship in hospitals. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
Evidence-based infection control principles and practices:Sterilization, Disinfection, 
Effective hand hygiene, Use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Infection control: Prevention & control of common healthcare-associated infections, 
Components of an effective infection control program, Guidelines (NABH and JCI) for 
Hospital Infection Control. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                            9 Hrs               
Antibiotics: Antibiotic Resistance, History of antibiotics, How resistance happens and 
spreads, Types of resistance- intrinsic, acquired, passive.   
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Drug resistance: Trends in drug resistance, Actions to fight resistance, Bacterial persistence, 
Antibiotic sensitivity.   
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                              9 Hrs 
Consequences of antibiotic resistance,Antimicrobial Stewardship – Barriers and 
opportunities, tools and models in hospitals   
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Apply effective infection control practices. 
2. Prevent and manage healthcare-associated infections. 
3. Explain the history and spread of antibiotic resistance. 
4. Identify and combat drug resistance trends. 
5. Implement antimicrobial stewardship strategies. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Infection Prevention and Control: Theory and Practice for Healthcare Professionals" by 
Debbie Weston 
2. "Antibiotics: Actions, Origins, Resistance" by Christopher Walsh 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Antimicrobial Stewardship: Principles and Practice" by Matthew Laundy, Lynda A. Sisson, 
and Matthew Dryden 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201E                            NSS & YOUTH DEVELOPMENT  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
The National Service Scheme (NSS) aims to develop students' personalities through 
community service and national integration. It encourages students to work towards societal 
development, fostering a sense of responsibility and civic duty. The program bridges 
academic learning and real-life experiences, promoting overall personal growth and social 
awareness among youth. 
Course Objectives:  
1. To explain the nature, functions and importance of NSS.  
2. To explain the role of NSS in the context of youth, community and voluntary service.  
3. To develop the necessary communication and soft skills.  
4. To appreciate the importance of health, hygiene and sanitation for a healthy nation.  
5. To develop the concept and skills of managing environment issues and disaster 
management.  
UNIT-I                      9 Hrs 
Youth Development Program in India and Role of Youth Leaders National Youth Policy; 
Youth Development Program at National Level, State Level, Volunteer Level; Youth centric 
and youth led organizations Role and Importance of youth leadership, Leadership capability 
and its development. 
 
UNIT-II                                    9 Hrs 
Meaning type of leader, Qualities, Traits, Role, Importance of a Good Leader Social, 
psychologic factors affecting the youth. 
Life Skills-Self-awareness, Empathy, Effective Communication, Decision Making; Role of 
Music and Art in Youth Development. 
 
UNIT-III                                    9 Hrs 
Basic Features of the Indian Constitution consumer protection act right to Information; Child 
Protection Act, Problems of Aging: Problems Protection of Interests. 
 
UNIT-IV                                    9 Hrs 
Side effects of modern lifestyle and their countermeasures Diet, exercise, sleep in Indian 
lifestyle; Collection, Utilization and Camp; Management of Camps; Biography of Swami 
Vivekananda. 
 
UNIT-V                                                  9 Hrs 
Field Work - Rural visit- campaign- rally- Competitions. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of this course, the learners will be able to:  
1. Explain the role and functions of NSS.  
2. Appraise the role of NSS volunteers in developing the society as a whole.  
3. Develop the necessary skills of effective communication, leadership and healthy 
living.  
4. Develop the necessary skills to mitigate disasters and other environmental challenges.  
5. Develop consciousness about personal health and hygiene.  
Text Books: 
1. Communication Skills by N Rao & R P Das (HPH)  
2. Biodiversity, Environment & Disaster Management by Shamna Hussain (Unique 
Publishers) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. NSS Manual published by the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, Govt. of India  
2. National Youth Policy Document  
3. National Service Scheme - A Youth Volunteers Programme For Under Graduate 
Students as Per UGC Guidelines by J D S Panwar, A K Jain & B K Rathi (Astral)  
4. Environmental Studies by P K Pandey (Mahaveer Publications) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT2501                               EXERCISE THERAPY-I                                          L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3  0   4   5 
Course Description: 
In this course the student will learn the principles, technique and effect of exercise as 
a therapeutic modality in the restoration of physical function. 
Course Objectives: 
1: In this course the student will learn the principlesof exercises as a therapeutic modality in 
the restoration of physical function. 
2. In this course the student will learn the technique of exercises as a therapeutic modality in 
the restoration of physical function. 
3.In this course the student will learn the effect of exercisesas a therapeutic modality in the 
restoration of physical function. 
4.The student will be able to list the indications and contraindicationsOf various types of 
exercise therapy 
5.The student will be able to demonstrate the different techniques and describe their effects. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                      10hours 
A.MECHANICS: Define the following terms and describe the principles involved with 
suitable examples. 
i. Force: Composition of force, Parallelogram of forces. 
ii. Equilibrium:Stable,unstable,neutral. 
iii. Gravity: Centre o gravity, Line of gravity. 
iv. Levers:1st, 2nd and3rdorder.Their examples in the human body and their practical 
Application in physiotherapy, Forces applied to the body levers. 
v. Pulleys:Fixed,Movable 
vi. Springs;Series,Parallel. 
vii. Tension. 
viii. Elasticity:Hookslaw. 
ix. Axis:Sagittal,Frontal,And Horizontal. 
x. Planes:Sagittal,Frontal,Horizontal 
xi. Definitions of: Speed, Velocity, Work, Energy, Power, Acceleration, Momentum, Friction 
and Inertia. 
II. MUSCLEACTION:  
i. Muscle work: Isotonic (concentric, eccentric), isometric(static) 
ii. Group actions: Agonists (prime movers), antagonists, synergists, fixators 
iii. Angle of muscle pull, mechanical efficiency of the muscles 
UNIT-II                                                                                         16hours 
MOVEMENTS:  
Explain the following terms with suitable examples: 
i. Anatomic movements: Flexion, Extension, Abduction, Inversion, Eversion, Supination, 
Pronation, Internal rotation, External rotation, Gross flexion, Gross extension, Trunk side 
flexion. 
ii. Surface anatomy of the individual joints. 
Iii.Rhythm of movement. 
Iv. Timing of movement. 
v. Duration of movement 
vi. Classification of movement: Active, Passive. 
vii. Effects of exercise: Physiological effects, Therapeutic effects. 
viii. List the indications and contraindications of the following and demonstrate the technique 
for each: 
a. Active movements: 
Voluntary(free, active assisted,assistedresisted,resisted), 
Involuntary (associated, reflex, peristaltic/visceral, cardiac). 
b. Passivemovements: 
Relaxed passive, mobilizing passive (forced P.M. 
Manipulations, serial manipulations), passive stretching. 
PASSIVEMOVEMENTS: 
I. Describe the types, techniques, indications and contraindications, physiological Effects and 
passive movements of joints. 
ii. Demonstrate passive stretching of following muscles/muscle groups of each upper limit 
and describe the indications, contraindications, physiological effects, advantages and 
disadvantages: pectoralis major, biceps brachii, triceps brachii, long flexors of the fingers. 
iii. Lower limb: rectus femoris, iliotibial band (tensorfascialata)gastrocnemius, soleus, 
hamstrings, hip adductors, iliopsoas. 
iv. Neck: Sternocleidomastoid mastoid 
UNIT-III                                                                                         16 hours 
MUSCLEGRADING: 
I. Describe the types of muscle grading, key to muscle grading, techniques of muscle testing. 
ii. Demonstrate the skill to grade the individual and group muscles   of upper and lower limb, 
neck and trunk muscles 
RE-EDUCATIONOFMUSCLES: 
i. Describe the term re-education of muscles and the techniques, spatial summation and 
temporal summation. 
ii. Demonstrate the various re-education techniques and facilitating methods for Various 
groups of muscles. 
iii. Demonstrate the progressive exercises in strengthening by using various 
applications:(according to their muscle power) Grade-I to Grade-IV. 
iv. Functional re-education—Mat exercises 
PROGRESSIVERESISTANCEEXERCISE: 
i. Describe the following exercises, their advantages and disadvantages and demonstrate the 
techniques of the following types of PREs: Fractional System, 
Macqueen’s set system, McQueen’s power system. 
ii. Demonstrate practically each system using: Delorme’s boot, dumbbells, sand bags in 
pulleys, powder board and suspension therapy. 
UNIT- IV:                                                                                          10 hours 
ACTIVEMOVEMENTS: 
i. Describe the types, techniques, indications and contraindications, physiological effects, 
advantages and disadvantages of active movements for the following muscle groups: 
Shoulder abductors, shoulder forward flexors, Triceps brachii, hip 
Abductors, hip flexors, quadriceps femoris abdominal muscles, back extensors. 
ii. Describe the home programme for strengthening neck muscles and back extensors 
GONIOMETRY: 
i. Describe the normal range of various joints. Describe goniometer, range of 
Measuring systems (180), foot, trunk and head, techniques of goniometer.                                                          
ii. Demonstrate measuring of individual joint range using goniometer. 
iii. Demonstrate measurement of limb girth (using measuring tape): arm, forearm, thigh, calf. 
UNIT-V                                                                                      8hours 
RELAXATION: 
i. Describe: Relaxation,Musclefatigue,Muscle spasm. 
ii. Describe: General causes, signs and symptoms of tension (mental and physical) 
iii. Factors contributing to fatigue, types of relaxation (local and general), 
Indications of relaxation, techniques of relaxation. 
iv. Breathing exercises-different types 
v. Demonstrate the techniques of relaxation (local and general 
COMPLICATION OF BED REST:  
i. Describe the complications of patients on prolonged bed rest. 
ii. Burgers exercises 
iii. Demonstrate maintenance exercises for patients on prolonged bed rest 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student can able to  
1: Understand the various types of muscle action 
2. Gain knowledge about active ,passive movements and passive stretching. 
3. Understand the concepts of Muscle grading and how to re-educate the muscles 
4.The student will be able Demonstrate measuring of individual joint range using goniometer  
5. Demonstrate the techniques of relaxation and maintenance exercises for patients on 
prolonged bed rest 
Text books: 
1. Principles of Exercise Therapy—Dena Gardener. 
2. Practical Exercise Therapy—Hollis. 
3. Therapeutic Exercise foundation &techniques—Kisner. 
Reference books: 
1. Muscle testing and function-F.Kendal. 
2. Muscle testing- Danial & Worthing hams. 
3. Measurement of joint motion—a guide to Goniometry-Cynthia Norkin. 
4. Therapeutic Exercise foundation and techniques-Carolyn Kisner. 
5. Text Book of Therapeutic Exercise-S. Lakshmi Narayana. 
6.Fundamentals of Physiotherapy-Kumar 
7. Principle of Exercise Testing and Interpretation-Kalrlman Wasswerman. 
8. Exercise Therapy-Prevention and Treatment of disease-John Gormly. 
9. Manual of massage and measurement—Edith. M.Prosser. 
10. Massage for therapists—Margaret Hollis. 
11. Principal and practice of Therapeutic Massage-Akhoury Gourang Sinha. 
12.Hand book of Clinical Massage-Mario-Paul—Cassar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT2502                                    BIOMECHANICS                                                   LT P C 
                                                                                                                                         4 0  4  6 
Course Description: 
This course supplements the knowledge of anatomy and enables the student to have a better 
understanding of the principles of biomechanics and their application in musculoskeletal 
function and dysfunction 
CourseObjectives: 
1: This course supplements the knowledge of anatomy and enables the student to have a 
better understanding of the principles of biomechanics and their application in 
Musculoskeletal function and dysfunction.  
2: student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of the principles of Biomechanics and 
Kinesiology and their application in health and disease. 
3.Student will be able to understand the joint structure and function  
4.Understand the axis and plane of motion for any given motion at a specific joint 
5.understand the muscle structure and function  
UNIT-I                                                                                            10 hours 
A. MECHANICS: 
1. Describe the types of motion, planes of motion, direction of motion and quantity of 
motion.  
2.Define forces, force vectors,componentsofforces.  
3. Describe gravity, segmental centres of gravity, centre of gravity of the human body, 
stability and centre of gravity, relocation of the centre of gravity.  
4. Describe Reactionforces, Newton’s lawofreaction.  
5. Describe equilibrium—Law of inertia and establishing equilibrium of an object.  
6. Describe objects in motion: Law of acceleration, joint distraction in a linear force system 
and force of friction. 
 7.Describe concurrent force system: Composition of forces, Muscle action lines, total muscle 
force vector, divergent muscle pulls, and anatomic pulleys.  
8. Describe parallel force systems: -First class levers, second class levers, third class levers, 
torque, and mechanical advantage.  
9.Define moment arm: Moment arm of a muscle force, moment arm of gravity and anatomic 
pulleys.  
10. Describeequilibriumoflever. 
B. JOINT STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION: Describe the basic principles of joint design and 
a human joint.  
2Describe the tissues present in human joints including dense fibrous tissue, bone, cartilage 
and connective tissue.  
3. Classify joints, synarthrosis, amphiarthrosis, diarthrosis, sub classification of synovial 
joints.  
4. Describe joint function, kinematic chains, rangeofmotion.  
5. Describe the general effects of injury and disease.  
C.MUSCLE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION:  
1. Describe mobility and stability functions of muscles.  
2. Describe elements of muscle structure, compositions of muscle fiber, the motor unit, and 
types of muscle fibers, muscle fiber size, arrangement and number, muscle tension, length
tension relationship.  
3. Describe types of muscle contraction, speed and angular velocity, applied load, voluntary 
control, torque & isokinetic exercise.  
4. Summarize factors affecting muscle tension. 
 5. Classify muscles: spurt and shunt muscles, tonic andphasic muscles.  
6. Factors affecting muscle function: Type of joint and location of muscle attachment, 
number of joints, passive insufficiency, sensory receptors. 
UNIT-II12 hours  
A.THE VERTEBRAL COLUMN:  
  1.Articulations, ligaments and muscles, typical vertebra,  
Intervertebral disc. 
2.Describe factors affecting stability and motility 
3. Regional structure and functions of cervical, dorsal, lumbar and sacral vertebrae. 
4. Describe the muscles of the vertebral column—flexors, extensors, rotators and Lateral 
flexors. 
5. 5.Describe the effects of injury and developmental deficits. 
Describethefollowing: 
1. The curves of the vertebral column using appropriate terminology. 
2. The articulations of the vertebral column. 
3. The major ligaments of the vertebral column. 
4. The structural components of typical and a typical vertebra. 
5. The intervertebral disc. 
6. Regional characteristics of vertebral structure. 
7. Motions of the vertebral column. 
8. Lumbar pelvic rhythm. 
9. Rotation of the vertebrae in each region. 
1. Movements of the ribs during rotation. 
B. POSTURE: -Describe the effects of gravity and indicate the 
Location of the gravity line in the sagittal plane in optimal Posture. -Analyse the posture with respect to theoptimalalignmentofjointsintheantero
posteriorandlateralviews. 
Describe: 
1. The position of the hip, knee and ankle joints in optimal erect posture. 
2. The position of body’s gravity line in optimal erect posture using appropriate points of 
Reference. 
3. The effects of gravitational movements on body segments in optimal erect posture. 
4. The gravitational movements acting around the vertebral column, pelvis, hip, knee and 
Ankle in optimal erect posture. 
5. Muscles and ligamentous structures that counter balance gravitational movements in 
Optimal erect posture. 
6. The following postural deviations: Pesplanus, hallux valgus, pescavus, idiopathic scoliosis, 
kyphosis and lordosis. 
7. The effects of above postural deviations on the body structures i.e., ligaments, joints and 
muscles. 
D.MECHANICS OF RESPIRATION:  
1. Describe the work of breathing. 
2. Movements of breathing. 
3. Respiratorymuscles. 
4. Complianceoflungs&chestwall. 
UNIT-III                                                                                        15hours 
A.THE SHOULDER COMPLEX:  
1. Describe the structural components of the shoulder complex including the articulating 
surfaces, capsular attachments and ligaments and movements of the  : 
i)Sternoclavicular  
ii)Acromioclavicular 
iii)Scapulothoracic  
IV) Glenohumeral.  
2. Describe the function of the shoulder complex including dynamic stability of the 
glenohumeral joint, Musculo humeral rhythm, scapula thoracic and gleno humeral 
contributions.  
3. Describe the muscles of elevation (Deltoid, Supraspinatus, Infraspinatus, Teres minor, 
Subscapularis, Upper Trapezius, lower Trapezius, Serratus anterior, and Middle Trapezius & 
Rhomboids).  
4. Describe the muscles of depression, Latissimus dorsi, Pectoralis, Teres Major, 
Rhomboids). 
B.THE ELBOW COMPLEX:  
1. Describe the structure of the Humeroulnar and Humeroradial joints including articulating 
surfaces, joint capsule, ligaments & muscles.  
2. Describe the function of the Humero ulnar and Humero radial joints including the Axis of 
motion, Range of motion, Muscle action.  
3. Describe the structure of the superior and inferior radioulnar joints.  
4.Describe the function of the superior and inferior radioulnarjoints.  
5. Describe the mobility and stability of the elbow complex and its relationship to hand and 
wrist.  
6. Describe the effects of injury and the resistance to longitudinal compression forces, to 
distraction forces and to medial-lateral forces. 
C.THE WRIST AND HAND COMPLEX: 
1. Describe the wrist complex including radiocarpal joint, mid carpal joint and the ligaments 
of the wrist complex. 
2. Describe the function of the radio carpal and midcarpal joints including the movements 
and muscles involved.  
3. Describe the hand complex including: structure of (Carpo metacarpal, 
Metacarpophalangeal and Interphalangeal joints of fingers, ligaments, range of motion.  
4. Describe the finger musculature including extrinsic, MCP and intrinsic   muscles.  
5. Describe the structure of the Carpometacarpal, MCP and IP joints of thumb.  
6. Describe the structure of the extrinsic& intrinsic muscles of thumb.  
7. Describe prehension, power,cylindrical,spherical& hook grips.  
8. Describe precision handling, pad to pad, tip to tip and pad to side prehension and 
functional position of wrist and hand. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                          15 hours  
 A.HIP COMPLEX:  
1.Describe the general features of the hip joint including articulating surface of the Pelvis & 
the femur; angulations ;angle of torsion; internal architecture of hip and Pelvis; joint capsule. 
Ligaments & muscles (flexors, extensors, one joint extensors, Two joint extensors, adductors, 
rotators and lateral rotators). 
2.Describe the function of hip—rotation between pelvis, spine and hip; Pelvic motion—
anterior and posterior pelvic, lumbar pelvic rhythm, lateral pelvic tilting, and pelvic rhythm. 
3. Summarize the pelvic motions in the static erect posture. 
4.Describe femoral motion. 
5. Describe hip stability in erect bilateral stance, sagittal equilibrium and unilateral stance. 
6. Describe reduction of forces and abnormalities with weight shifting and cane and 
Deviations from normal in muscular weakness. 
Describe the following: 
1. The articulating surfaces of the pelvis and femur. 
2. The structure and function of the trabecular systems of pelvis and femur. 
3. The structure and function of the ligaments of the hip. 
4. The angle of inclination and the angle of torsion. 
5. The planes and axes of the following pelvic motions and the accompanying motions at the 
lumbar spine and hip joints, pelvic rotation, and anterior, posterior and lateral tilting Of the 
pelvis. 
6. The muscle activity that produces tilting and rotation of the pelvis. 
7. Motions of the femur on the pelvis including planes and axes of motion. 
8. The structure and function of all the muscles associated with the hip joint. 
9. The forces that act on the head of femur. 
10.The position of greatest stability at the hip 
B.THE KNEE COMPLEX: 
1.Describe the structures of the tibiofemoral joint, articulating surfaces on femur and tibia, 
the menisci, joint capsule and bursae, ligaments and other supporting structures, anterior, 
posterior, medial and lateral stability muscles involved; knee flexors &extensors: axes of 
knee complex: mechanical axis, anatomic axis and axis of motion. 
2. Describe the functions of the tibiofemoral joint: range of motion: flexion, extension, 
rotation, abduction, adduction, locking and unlocking; function of menisci and muscle 
function. 
3. Describe the structure of the patella femoral joint. 
4. Describe the function of the patella femoral joint. 
5. Describe the effects of injury and disease of the tibiofemoral and patella femoral joints. 
Describe the following:- 
1. The articulating surfaces of tibiofemoral and patellofemoral joints. 
2. The joint capsule. 
3. The anatomic and mechanical axes of knee. 
4. Motion of the femoral condyles during flexion and extension in a closed kinematic chain. 
5. Motion of the tibia in flexion and extension in an open kinematic chain. 
THE ANKLE FOOT COMPLEX:  
1. Describe the structure, ligaments, axis and function of the following : 
Ankle joint, tibiofibular joints, subtalar joints, Talocalcaneal navicular joints, transverse tarsal 
joint .Tarsometatarsal joint, Plantar arches, metatarsophalangeal joints, Interphalangeal joints. 
2.Describe the terminology unique to the  ankle foot complex, including  inversion, eversion 
,pronation, supination, dorsi flexion, plantar flexion, flexion, extension, adduction and 
abduction. 
Describe: 
1. The compound articulations of the ankle, subtalar, talocalcaneonavicular, transverse tarsal 
and tarsometatarsal joint. 
2. The role of the tibiofibular joints and supporting ligaments. 
3. The degrees of freedom and range of motion available at the joints of the ankle and the 
foot. 
4. The significant ligaments that support the ankle, subtalar and transverse tarsal joints. 
5. The Tri planar nature of ankle joint motion. 
6. The articular movements that occur in the weight-bearing subtalar joint during   inversion
eversion. 
7. The relationship between tibial rotation and subtalar/ talocalcaneonavicular inversion
eversion. 
8. The relationship between hind foot inversion—eversion and motility-stability of the 
transverse tarsal   joint. 
9. The functions of the tarsometatarsal joints, including when, motion at these joints is called 
upon. 
10. Supination—pronation of the fore foot at the tarsometatarsal joints. 
11. Distribution of weight with in the foot. 
12. The structure and function of the plantar arches including the primary supporting 
structure. 
13. Muscles supplementing plantar arch. 
14. The effects of toe extension on the plantar arch. 
15. The general function of the extrinsic muscles of ankle & foot. 
16. The general function of the intrinsic muscles of foot. 
UNIT-V8hours 
A. TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT:(TMJ)  
1.Introduction   
2. General features 
3.Structure & articulation  
4.Function/dysfunction 
GAIT  
1. The stance, swing and double support phases of gait. 
2.The time and distance parameters of gait. 
Describe: 
1. Joint motion at the hip, knee and ankle for one extremity during a gait cycle. 
2. The location of line of gravity in relation to the hip, knee and ankle during the stance 
phases of gait. 
3. The gravitational movements of force acting at the hip, knee and ankle during the stance 
phase. 
Course Outcomes: 
1.Gain knowledge about the types of motion, planes of motion, direction of motion and 
quantity of motion and types of forces 
2.Understand the basicprinciplesofjointdesignandahumanjoint. 
3.Understand the various types of muscles and factorsaffectingmuscletension 
4.learn to Analyse the posture with respect to theoptimalalignmentofjoints in the antero
posteriorandlateralviews. 
5.Understand the mechanics of respiration. 
Textbooks : 
1. Text Book of   Biomechanics—Cynthia Norkin 
Reference Books: 
1. The    Physiology of the joints (VolumeI,II,III)-IAKapandji.  
2.Clinical Kinesiology and Anatomy-Lynn.S.Lippert 
 
 
 
BPTT2503                        LOW AND MEDIUM FREQUENCY                            L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       3  0  4  5 
Course Description: 
This course supplements the knowledge of various low frequency currents and the 
modalities and enables the student to have a better understanding of the principles of working 
of the low frequency currents using modalities and their therapeutic application in 
musculoskeletal and neurological dysfunction 
Course Objectives: 
1: In this course the student will learn the principles, technique of application of low 
frequency currents 
2.Learn the therapeutic effect of modality in the restoration of physical function. 
3.The student will be able to list out the indications and contraindications 
Of various Low and Medium Frequency currents 
4: The student will be able to demonstrate the different techniques and describe the 
physiological and therapeutic effects of Low and Medium Frequency currents 
5.Gain knowledge about the modalities in re-education of muscle function in peripheral nerve 
injuries. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                 9hours 
BASICPHYSICS 
A. STATIC ELECTRICITY 
1.Structure of matter 
2.Structure of atom 
3.Theories of electricity 
4.Production of electrical charge 
5.Characters of charged body 
6.Potential and capacity 
B. CURRENT ELECTRICITY 
1.Electric current 
2.Resistances: series andparallel 
3.Regulation of intensity 
4.Electrical energy and power 
5.Thermal effect and electric current 
C.CHEMICAL EFFECTS OF CURRENTS 
1.Ions and compounds 
D.MAGNETISM AND METERS: 
1.Nature of magnets 
2.Magnetic effect of an electric current 
3.Moving coil milli ammeter 
4.Voltmeter 
E. ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION  
1.Principles 
2.Static transformers 
F. CONDENSER 
1.Potential and capacity 
2.Capacitor and construction 
3.Electricfield 
G.MAINSUPPLY 
1.Production 
2.Wiring of houses 
UNIT-II                                                                                         10 hours 
LOW FREQUENCY 
A. DC FOR TREATMENT 
1.Cellbattery 
2.RectificationofAC 
3.DCfortreatment 
4.Careofapparatus 
5.Surging 
B. MODIFIED DC 
1.ModificationofDC 
2.Therapeuticeffects 
3.Methodsandtechniques 
4.Methodsofapplication 
C.CONSTANTDC 
1.Therapeuticeffects 
2.Cathodalandanodalgalvanism 
3.Technique                  
D.IONISATION  
1.Theories 
2.Effects 
3.Techniques 
4. Surgicalionization. 
E. ELECTRIC SHOCK 
1.Causes 
2.Earthshock 
3.Burns-electrical,chemical 
4.Preventionsandmanagement 
UNIT-III                                                                                    10 hours 
A. FARADIC AND SINUSOIDAL APPARATUS 
1.Faradic   current and   coils 
2.Sinusoidal currents 
B. FARADIC AND SINUSOIDAL CURRENTS 
1.Physiological   and   therapeutic effects 
2.Technique 
C.ELECTRICAL STIMULATION OF   NERVE AND MUSCLE 
1.Muscle contraction 
2.Duration of stimulus 
3.Frequency 
UNIT-IV                                                                                             8 hours 
ELECTRICAL   REACTIONS 
1.Changes    in electrical    reactions 
2.FGtest 
3.SDcurve 
4.EMG, NCV  
ELECTROANALGESIA 
1.Pain—definition 
2.Acute/chronicpain 
3. Theories   of pain: specificity, summation, pattern theories. 
4.Pain gate   mechanism 
5.Descending pain suppression    mechanism 
6.TENS 
7.Types  of TENS 
8.Parameters 
9.Dosage 
10.Indications 
11.Contraindications 
12.Dangers 
UNIT-V                                                                                               8 hours 
MEDIUM FREQUENCY 
A. Types  of  Medium frequency currents    and characteristics  of different medium 
Frequency currents  (amplitude,  duration  and frequency)  
B. Interferential   Therapy 
1.Introduction 
2.Principles 
3.Physiological effects 
4.Indications 
5.Contraindications 
6.Dosage 
7.Methods of applications 
8.Dangers 
Course Outcomes: 
1. In this course the student will learn the principles, technique of application of low 
frequency currents 
2.Learn the therapeutic effect of modality in the restoration of physical function. 
3.The student will be able to list out the indications and contraindications 
Of various Low and Medium Frequency currents 
4.The student will be able to demonstrate the different techniques and describe the 
physiological and therapeutic effects of Low and Medium Frequency currents 
5.Gain knowledge about the modalities in re-education of muscle function in peripheral nerve 
injuries. 
Text books: 
1. ClaytonsElectrotherapy. 
2.EletrotherapyExplained-LowandReed 
3. BasicsofElectrotherapy-SubhashKhatri 
Reference books: 
1. ElectrotherapyExplained—Joseph Kahn. 
2. Electrotherapy-S.Kitchen. 
3.Text book of electrotherapy-Jagmohan singh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT2504                                     PATHOLOGY                                                   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    2 0 0 2 
Course Description: 
This course will provide the knowledge of pathological changes that occurs in common 
diseases. 
Course Objectives: 
1: The student will be   able to demonstrate an understanding of thePathology   of common 
diseases that therapists would encounter intheir daily practice. 
2: The course will also help therapists understand how to protect themselves and their 
patients from nosocomial infections during their interactions 
3.Provides accurate disease diagnoses, guides Student effective physiotherapy treatment plan 
and contributes to preventive measures for common diseases 
4.student will learn microscopic and macroscopic pathological changes of the diseases. 
5.Pathology offering vital insights into the roots and remedies of musculoskeletal, 
neurological and cardiorespiratory conditions. 
UNIT-I                                                                                               5 hours 
Introduction: 
1. Concepts of disease, classification.  
2. Bacterial, viral and parasitic infections-a general outline.  
3. Inflammation and repair; Degeneration, necrosis and gangrene.  
4.Haemorrhage shock, embolism, thrombosis 
UNIT-II                                                                                             3 hours 
1.Deficiency diseases 
2.Tumours: Aetiology &spread  . Common   tumours 
3.Urinary system 
UNIT-III                                                                                           5 hours 
1.Tuberculosis, Leprosy, Typhoid 
2.Skin: Leprosy 
3.Scleroderma and Psoriasis 
UNIT-IV                                                                                         8 hours 
1.Respiratory system: Pneumonias, Bronchiectasis, Emphysema, Chronic bronchitis, Asthma 
2.Blood: Anemia, Heart and blood vessels, common congenital anomalies, 
Rheumatic&Coronary heart diseases 
UNIT-V                                                                                             9 hours 
1. Bone and joints: Autoimmune diseases, septic arthritis, Osteomyelitis,  
2.Rheumatoid Arthritis. 
3. Volkmann’sIschemia 
4.. Diseases of muscle   including   Poliomyelitis, Myopathies 
5.Central nervous   system: CNS infections, vascular disorders. 
Course Outcomes: 
1: The student will be   able to demonstrate an understanding of the Pathology   of common 
diseases that therapists would encounter in their daily practice. 
2: The course will also help therapists understand how to protect themselves and their 
patients from nosocomial infections during their interactions 
3.Provides accurate disease diagnoses, guides Student effective physiotherapy treatment plan 
and contributes to preventive measures for common diseases 
4.student will learn microscopic and macroscopic pathological changes of the diseases. 
5.Pathology offering vital insights into the roots and remedies of musculoskeletal, 
neurological and cardiorespiratory conditions 
Text books: 
1.Essential Pathology for physiotherapy students - Mohan 
2.Text Book of Pathology-Robbins. 
Reference books: 
1.Text Book of Pathology-William Boyd. 
 
 
 
 
BPTT2505                                     MICRBIOLOGY                                                L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      2 0 0 2 
Course Description: 
This course will provide the knowledge of micro-organisms that causes common diseases. 
Course Objectives: 
1: The student will be learning theMicro-organisms causing common diseases that therapist 
would encounter in their daily practice. 
2: The course will also help therapists understand how to protect themselves and their 
patients from nosocomial infections during their interactions 
3.Student will gain the knowledge about Hospital acquired infections. 
4.Learn basic methods of sterilization. 
5.Acquire knowledge of common immunological disorders and their resultant effects on the 
human body. 
UNIT-I                                                                                               8hours 
General Microbiology:  
a. History 
classification of Microorganisms, morphology of Bacteria, Viruses and Fungi. 
c. Important virulence factors of Bacteria 
d.Sterilization and Disinfection 
e. Antibacterial, antifungal and antiviral agents. 
f. Infection types, Source, transmission, spread 
UNIT-II                                                                                           5 hours 
Fundamentals of immunology: 
A . Innate and Acquired Immunity 
b.Antigen,Antibody 
c. Immune Response 
d. Hypersensitivity Reactions 
UNIT-III                                                                                          6 hours 
Pathogenesis, Disease spectrum, management and prevention of :(Emphasis on Bacterial and 
Viral infections) 
a. Respiratory tract Infections: 
b.  Tuberculosis and Leprosy 
UNIT-IV                                                                                          6hours 
Pathogenesis, Disease spectrum, management and prevention of :(Emphasis on Bacterial and 
Viral infections) 
a. CNS infections: Meningitis, Encephalitis, Poliomyelitis 
b. GIT infections: (with additional emphasis on important parasitic diseases, Hepatitis 
viruses) 
c. Blood stream infections 
UNIT-V                                                                                          5hours 
Pathogenesis, Disease spectrum, management and prevention of :(Emphasis on Bacterial and 
Viral infections) 
 a. Genitourinary infections: Urinary tract infections, sexually transmitted Infections 
Wound infections and anaerobic infections 
b. Hospital acquired infections: Types, causes and prevention stream 
Course Outcomes: 
1: The student will be learning the Micro-organisms causing common diseases that therapist 
would encounter in their daily practice. 
2: The course will also help therapists understand how to protect themselves and their 
patients from nosocomial infections during their interactions 
3.Student will gain the knowledge about Hospital acquired infections. 
4.Learn basic methods of sterilization. 
5.Acquire knowledge of common immunological disorders and their resultant effects on the 
human body. 
Text books: 
1.TextBookofMicrobiology-Anantanarayan 
2.TextBook of Microbiology-Baweja 
Reference books: 
1.EssentialsofMedicalMicrobiology-RajeshBhatia-RattanLalIcchpujani. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT2501                    EXERCISE THERAPY-II                                      L T P C 
                                                                                                                          3 0  4  5 
Course Description: 
In this course the student will learn the principles, technique and effect of exercise as 
a therapeutic modality in the restoration of physical function. 
Course Objectives: 
1: In this course the student will learn the principles of exercises as a therapeutic modality in 
the restoration of physical function. 
2. In this course the student will learn the technique of exercises as a therapeutic modality in 
the restoration of physical function. 
3. In this course the student will learn the effect of exercises as a therapeutic modality in the 
restoration of physical function. 
4.The student will be able to list the indications and contraindications Of various types of 
exercise therapy 
5. The student will be able to demonstrate the different techniques and describe their effects 
UNIT-I                                                                                               8 hours 
A.SUSPENSIONTHERAPY:  
I. Describe the basic principle of simple pendulum and pendular movement. 
ii. Describe the type of suspension: Pendular, axial, eccentric fixation (anterior, posterior, 
medial & lateral). 
iii. Explain the indications and technique for each type of suspension. 
Iv .  Demonstrate axial and eccentric fixation for mobilizing, strengthening and reeducation 
of various muscles and joint 
B.HYDROTHERAPY:i. Describe Hydrostatic pressure, upward thrust of water buoyancy. 
ii. List the indications and contra-indications for hydrotherapy. 
iii. Describe the dress of patients and the therapist and necessary hydrotherapy    equipment. 
iv. Types of hydrotherapy: Sterile pool contrast bath, whirl pool bath, hubbard tank. 
v. Construction of hydrotherapy tank: Design of construction, safety features, cleaning the 
pool, water heating systems, hygiene of patient and pool. 
UNIT-II                                                                                              8 hours 
A. PELVICTILT:  
Describe the following: 
i. Normal pelvic tilts, alterations from normal: anterior tilt (forward), posterior tilt (back 
ward) lateral tilt. 
ii. Muscles responsible for alterations and pelvic rotation. 
iii. Identification of normal pelvic tilts, pelvic rotation and altered tilts and their corrective 
measures. 
B. STARTING POSITIONS:  
I. Describe the following starting positions, their muscle work effects and uses. 
ii. Specify the importance and derived positions for each one. 
Standing,kneeling, sitting,lying,hanging 
C.POSTURE: 
i. Describe the following: Posture (static and dynamic),Definition of good posture,Muscles 
responsible for good posture. Postural mechanisms, Definition of Abnormal posture 
(Kyphosis, Scoliosis, Lordosis, Kypho-scoliosis, Kypholordosis), 
ii. Assessment of posture (inspection, Scoliosis, Lordosis, Kypho-scoliosis,  Kypholordosis), 
iii. Assessment of posture(inspection, measurement—length of  legs, width of pelvis, plumb 
line—R.O.M.o f trunk in flexion, extension ,side flexion and 
rotation. 
iii. Describe and demonstrate postural correction by: Strengthening of muscles, Mobilization 
of trunk, Relaxation. Active correction of the deformities, passive Correction(traction), 
postural awareness, abdominals and back extensors. 
iv. Outline principles in bracing of the trunk and surgical correction. 
v. Demonstrate practically: Identification of abnormal posture, and postural corrective 
measures. 
UNIT-III                                                                                             7 hours 
A.JOINTMOBILITY:  
Describe the following: 
i. Joint ranges (outer range ,middle range, inner range),individual joint structures, joint 
movements (anatomic, accessory), causes of joint range limitations, prevention of joint 
stiffness,positioning (physiological resting position). 
ii. Passive range of movement, methods of relaxation, active exercises, manual mobilization 
techniques. 
iii.Forcedpassivemovements:smallamplitudes,largeamplitudes. 
iv. Muscle strengthening techniques (PNF):Hold-relax, slow reversal, rhythmic stabilization, 
repeated contractions. 
v. Accessory movements: Posterior, anterior, superior and inferior glide, traction and 
approximation. 
vi. Indications and contra-indications for mobilization of individual joints; demonstrate 
practically the various mobilization techniques for individual joints and teaching home 
programme 
B. COORDINATION:  
Define balance (static and dynamic) 
Explain the mechanism of neuromuscular co-ordination. 
Describe the in coordination due to: Lower motor neuron lesions(flaccidity) Upper motor 
neuron lesions (spasticity) Cerebellar lesions, Loss of kinesthetic sense (tabes dorsalis, 
syringomyelia, and leprosy), Imbalance due to muscular disease. 
Describe re-education of balance. 
Describe re-education of co-ordination: Frenkel’s exercises, proprioceptive neuromuscular 
facilitation (PNF)techniques. 
Demonstrate the re-education techniques ofbalance and coordination 
UNIT-IV                                                                                           10hours 
A.GAIT:  
i. Define gait and center of gravity of the human body. 
ii. Describe muscles responsible for normal gait, six determinants of gait (pelvic rotation, 
pelvic tilt, hip flexion, lateral displacement of pelvis, knee flexion, instance phase, normal 
foot pattern during walking). 
iii. Describe the walking cycle: Stance (heel strike, foot flat, midstance, and foot off), Swing 
(acceleration, midswing and deacceleration). 
iv.  Describe the following pathological gaits: Gluteus medius Gait, Gluteus maximus gait, 
Hip flexor weakness gait, Quadriceps weakness gait, Foot drop gait, Hemiplegic gait, Ataxic 
waddling gait, Equinus gait, Calcaneus gait, Equino varus gait. 
v. Demonstrate skill in identifying pathological gait and proper gait training. 
B. CRUTCH WALKING: 
i. Describe the following: 
a. Components of a crutch, 
b. Types or classification of crutches 
c. Characters of good crutch 
d. Preparing a patient for crutch walking 
e. Crutch walking muscles, 
f. Measurement of crutches (axillary piece, handpiece), 
g. Crutch stance, crutch palsy, 
h. Types of crutch walking (4point,3point,3point (non-weight bearing and partial weight 
bearing), modified 3point (paraplegic and shuffling gait, swing to and swing through) 
ii. Demonstrate crutch measurement 
(sitting, standing and lying positions) and various types of crutch walking (even ground, 
stairs and ramps 
UNIT-V                                                                                            12hours 
A. Soft Tissue Manipulation: 
i. History of massage. 
ii. Mechanical points to be considered 
iii. Points to be considered while giving massage 
a. Manipulations. 
b. The time of the day for treatment. 
c. The comfort and support of the patient (draping and positioning) 
d. Position of operator (therapists’ stance) 
e. Using body weight 
f. Contact and continuity 
g. Techniques, indications and contra—indications. 
iv. Physiological effects of massage on various systems of body. 
Effects on: Excretory system, Circulatory system, Muscular system, Nervous system 
&Metabolic system. 
B. Define and describe the various manipulation 
techniques used in massage. 
1.Stroking manipulation: Effleurage, stroking 
2. Pressure manipulations: Kneading, squeezing, stationary, circular ironing (reinforced 
kneading), finger kneading, petrissage (picking up, wringing, rolling), frictions. 
3. Percussion manipulation: tapotement, hacking, clapping, beating & pounding. 
4. Shaking manipulations: vibration, shaking. 
C. Define and describe the technique, effects, uses and contra-indications of the Following 
manipulations: 
1. Stroking manipulations. 
2. Pressure manipulations. 
3. Percussion manipulations. 
4. Shaking manipulations. 
D. Demonstrate the following techniques on patients/models: 
i. Massage for upper limb: 
a. Scapular region 
b. Shoulder joint 
c. Upper arm 
d. Elbow joint 
e. Forearm 
f. Wrist joint 
g. Hand. 
ii. Massage for lower limb: 
a. Thigh 
b. Knee joint 
c. Leg 
d.Foot (includinganklejointsandtoes) 
iii. Massage for back: 
a. Neck and upper back 
b. Middle and lower back 
c. Gluteal region, arm &leg. 
iv. Massage for the face 
Course Out comes:After the completion of the course the student can able to  
1: Understand the principles and techniques of suspension therapy and hydrotherapy 
2. Gain knowledge about starting and derived positions 
3. Understand the Posture and how to assess the posture 
4.The student will be able Demonstrate the pathological gaits and gait training by using 
mobility aids 
5. Demonstrate the soft tissue manipulations 
Text books: 
1. Principles of Exercise Therapy—Dena Gardener. 
2. Practical Exercise Therapy—Hollis. 
3. Therapeutic Exercise foundation &techniques—Kisner. 
Reference books: 
1. Muscle testing and function-F.Kendal. 
2. Muscle testing- Danial & Worthing hams. 
3. Measurement of joint motion—a guide to Goniometry-Cynthia Norkin. 
4. Therapeutic Exercise foundation and techniques-Carolyn Kisner. 
5. Text Book of Therapeutic Exercise-S. Lakshmi Narayana. 
6.Fundamentals of Physiotherapy-Kumar 
7. Principle of Exercise Testing and Interpretation-Kalrlman Wasswerman. 
8. Exercise Therapy-Prevention and Treatment of disease-John Gormly. 
9. Manual of massage and measurement—Edith. M.Prosser. 
10. Massage for therapists—Margaret Hollis. 
11. Principal and practice of Therapeutic Massage-Akhoury Gourang Sinha. 
12.Hand book of Clinical Massage-Mario-Paul—Cassar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT2507                             HIGH FREQUENCY                                              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                   3 0 45 
Course Description: 
This course supplements the knowledge of various high frequency currents and the 
modalities and enables the student to have a better understanding of the principles of working 
of the high frequency currents using modalities and their therapeutic application in 
musculoskeletal and neurological dysfunction and pain. 
Course Objectives: 
1: In this course the student will learn the principles, technique and effect of therapeutic 
modality in the restoration of physical function. 
2:  The student will be able to list the indications and contraindications 
Of various HIGH FREQUENCY modalities 
3: The student will be able to demonstrate the different techniques and describe the 
physiological and therapeutic effects of HIGH FREQUENCY modalities 
4 : The student will be able to demonstrate the techniques of application of various modalities 
for relief of pain (Clinical decision making) 
5.Learns about the mechanism of pain relief by various modalities 
UNIT-I                                                                                               9 hours 
BASIC PHYSICS:  
A. Define electricity: Discuss its properties briefly. 
1.Describe the 2 types of electricity—static, current. 
2.Cell battery, electrical energy and power 
B.Magnetism;Discussbriefly: 
 1.Nature-molecular theory 
2.Magnetic effect of an electric current 
3.Properties 
C.Define electromagnetic induction.Discuss:  
1.EMF 
2.Principles of Dynamo 
3.Principles, construction & types of transformers 
4. Choke coil. 
D. Condensers. 
Define and discuss:  
1.Principles 
2.Measurement 
3.Factors determining capacity 
4.Construction 
5.Field between condensers 
6.Charging and discharging 
7. Discharge through inductance & capacitive resistance. 
E. Rectifiers  
1.Types of rectifiers 
• Valve rectifiers-diode valve, triode valve—construction, function 
• Metal rectifiers—construction & function of rectifiers 
2.Types of rectification—half wave & full wave rectification 
3.Smoothening circuit 
F. Explain with diagram the working and use  of the fuse  and grid, switch and reversal 
switch  
G.Discuss the various devices  usedinregulating  intensity of current.—rheostat And potential 
divider  
H.Define oscillation. What is “capacitance” and “inductance”? Give an example of an 
oscillating system: 
1. What is the frequency of oscillation and how is it calculated in brief? 
2. What do you mean by damping of oscillation? 
3. How does transfer of energy between 2 circuits take place? 
Physics of heat & Radiation 
 1.Heat & temperature 
2.Physical effects of heat 
3.Transmission of heat 
4.Radiantenergy 
5.Electromagnetic spectrum 
6.Laws governing radiations 
7.Reflectors 
8.Inverse square law 
UNIT-II                                                                                             12 hours 
I.SHORTWAVE DIATHERMY:  
A. PROPERTIES OF H.F. CURRENTS 
1. Sustained and unsustained. 
2.Damped and undamped 
3.Impedance 
4. Define Nodes and Antinodes. Explain, with examples the field’s set up etc. 
5. Define wavelength. 
B. TYPES OF HIGH FREQUENCY CURRENTS 
C.PRODUCTION OF H.F. CURRENTS; 
1.Principles 
2. Construction of apparatus with diagram. 
3. Tuning of machine. 
4. Regulation of current. 
D.METHODS: 
1.Condenser field 
2. Cable method. 
3. Effectsof2fields. 
E. PHYSIOLOGICAL AND THERAPEUTIC EFFECTS OF S.W.D. 
F. TECHNIQUE OF APPLICATION: 
1. Testing machine. 
2. Preparation of patient. 
3.Types of electrodes 
4.Position and size of electrodes 
5.Selection of electrode-electrostatic field & electromagnetic field 
6.Electrostatic field—spacing need & types 
And position Size of electrodeApplication 
7.Electromagnetic field—Cable method of applications 
8.Dosage 
G. PULSED ELECTROMAGNETIC ENERGY 
H. DANGERS AND PRECAUTIONS. 
I.INDICATIONS AND CONTRA-INDICATIONS. 
II.MICROWAVE DIATHERMY(M.W.): 
A.1.PRODUCTION—EXPLAINWITHDIAGRAM 
2. Explain how the magnetron works within. 
3. Application of M.W. 
4.Physiological effects 
5. Therapeutic effects. 
B. TECHNIQUE OF APPLICATION—DOSAGE(INDETAIL) 
C.INDICATIONS & CONTRA—INDICATIONS. 
D.DANGERS. 
UNIT-II                                                                                             I8 hours 
ACTINOTHERAPY  
A. INFRAREDRAYS:  
1. I.R. WAVE LENGTH AND FREQUENCY. 
2. Types of generators and their working. 
3. Physiological effects. 
4. Therapeutic effects and uses. 
B. TECHNIQUE OF IRRADIATION. 
1.Choice of apparatus 
2.Preparation of patient 
3.Arrangement of lamp 
4.Application of treatment 
5. Duration and frequency. 
C.BRIEFLY DISCUSS DANGERS 
D.INDICATIONS & CONTRA—INDICATIONS. 
E. THERAPEUTIC USES— 
I.PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS. 
II.ULTRAVIOLET RADIATION:  
A. PHYSICS 
1.Electric arc 
2. Process of ionization. 
3. Transmission of current through gases. 
4.Types of lamps 
B. CONSTRUCTION OF LAMPS 
1.High pressure mercury vapour lamps 
2.Kromayer lamp 
3. Tridymite formation. 
4.Cooling 
5.Spectrum —mercury vapour lamp 
6. Fluorescent tube for U.V.Production. 
7.PUVA apparatus 
8. Care of lamp 
C.PHYSIOLOGICAL AND THERAPEUTIC EFFECTS—IN DETAIL; 
PHOTO-SENSITIZATION— 
D.INDICATION, CONTRAINDICATION AND DANGERS. 
E. TECHNIQUE OF APPLICATION; 
1.Test dose 
2.Local treatment 
3.General irradiation 
4.Treatment 
F. CONDITIONS (COMMON) IN WHICH ABOVE TREATMENT IS GIVEN 
G. SENSITISERS 
H. FILTERS 
I.COMPARISON BETWEEN I.R.&U.V. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                              8 hours 
HEAT & COLDTHERAPY  
A) THERAPEUTIC CONDUCTION HEATING 
1.General principles 
2.Thermal regulatory mechanism 
3.Physiological regulation 
4.Physiological effects of local tissue heating 
5.Sites of tissue heating 
6.Burns 
7.Paraffin wax bath 
8.Hydrocollatoral packs 
9.Hydrotherapy 
10.Heated air treatment 
11.Fluidotherapy 
12.Electric heating pads 
13.Physiological & therapeutic effects of superficial heating 
14.Indications/contraindications 
B) CRYOTHERAPY 
1. Physiological changes due to cooling of the skin 
2.Therapeutic uses of cold 
3.Methods of application 
4.Contrasting heat & cold treatment 
5.Vapocoolant sprays—cryokinetics &cryostretch 
6.Dangers & contraindications 
UNIT-V                                                                                              8hours 
ULTRASONIC THERAPY  
A. What is U.S.Therapy 
B. Explain with the aid of diagram the production of U.S.  Waves and Piezo Electric Effect. 
C. Three Properties of U.S. Wavesi n detail 
1)Reflection 
2)Transmission and 
3)Absorption 
D.Properties of ultrasonic field/depth of penetration in relation to(a)intensity and(b) 
Frequency. 
E .Effects on tissues: 
1 Thermal 
2 Mechanical 
3 Chemical and biological 
4 Effects of ultrasound on inflammation &repair process 
F .CouplingMedia 
G. Mode of U.S—pulsed and continuous mode. 
H.  Therapeutic uses of U.S 
I. Techniques of application: 
1 Method 
i. Direct contact 
ii. Water bath 
iii. Waterbag 
2.Dosage in acute and chronic conditions 
3. Testing of apparatus. 
J. Dangers 
K. Indications & contra—indications. 
L. Phonophoresis, drugs used in phonophoresis & its application 
TRACTION  
1. Effects of spinal traction 
2. Types 
3. Application techniques 
4. Indications 
5. Adverse effects of spinal traction 
6. Contraindications 
7. Precautions 
Course Outcomes: 
1: In this course the student will learn the principles, technique and effect of therapeutic 
modality in the restoration of physical function. 
2:  The student will be able to list the indications and contraindications 
Of various HIGH FREQUENCY modalities 
3: The student will be able to demonstrate the different techniques and describe the 
physiological and therapeutic effects of HIGH FREQUENCY modalities 
4: The student will be able to demonstrate the techniques of application of various modalities 
for relief of pain (Clinical decision making). 
5.Understand the mechanism of pain relief by various high frequency modalities. 
Text books: 
1. Claytons Electrotherapy. 
2.EletrotherapyExplained-LowandReed 
3. Basics of Electrotherapy-Subhash Khatri 
Reference books: 
1. Electrotherapy Explained—Joseph Kahn. 
2. Electrotherapy-S.Kitchen. 
3.Text book of electrotherapy-Jagmohan singh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PEDIATRICS & GENERAL MEDICINE & PHARMACOLOGY 
BPTT3501L T P C 
4 0 0 4 
Course Description: 
This course introduces the general infectious and inflammatory disease of the adults, growth 
and development and paediatric diseases. Introduce the students to basic pharmacology of 
various common medications used and their effects on patients at rest and during physical 
activity 
Course Objectives: 
1: Introduce the students to basic pharmacology of various common medications used and 
their Effects on patients at rest and during physical activity 
2: The student will be able to explain the growth and development of a child 
3:The student will be able to List the maternal and neonatal factors contributing to high-risk 
pregnancy and the neonate 
4.Student learn about the various infectious diseases and diseases of bones and joints, 
metabolic diseases 
5.Gain knowledge of cardiorespiratory diseases. 
UNIT-I                                                                                              18 hours 
GENERALMEDICINE: 
A. INFECTIONS: 
Outline the etiology, mode of spread, clinical features, diagnosis, management and 
prevention 
Of the following infections: 
a. Viral—Japanese encephalitis,chikungunya and related viral arthritis, herpes simplex, 
Varicella, Measles, Rubella, hepatitisB, hepatitis and HIV infections. 
b. Bacterial— Hansen’sdisease andtetanus. 
c. Parasitic—Filariasis. 
B. HEMATOLOGY: 
Outline the etiology ,clinical features, diagnosis and management of the following disorders: 
a. Iron, folic acid and B12 deficiency anemia. 
B. Bleeding and clotting disorders with a special stress on haemophilia. 
C.DISORDERS OF BONE, JOINT AND CONNECTIVE TISSUES: 
1.Brief introduction to concepts of autoimmune disease. 
2.Define systemic lupus erythematosus, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, Polyarteritis nodosa, 
and scleroderma. 
3. Rheumatoid arthritis—Describe etiology, clinical features and complications, drug 
Therapy and nonpharmacological therapy. 
4.Osteoarthritis—Describe etiology, clinical features and complications and review 
Nonsteroidal anti—inflammatory drugs and steroids. 
D.RENAL DISEASES: 
1. Define and briefly outline acute and chronic renal failure. 
2. Urinary tract infection: pathogenesis .Outline common clinical complications produced By 
UTI. 
E.METABOLICDISEASES: 
Outline  theetiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of the following disorders: 
Diabetes mellitus, obesity and disorders of calcium metabolism. 
F.GERIATRICS: 
List diseases commonly encountered in the elderly population and their role in causing 
disability: hypertension, ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular accidents, benign prostatic 
hyperplasia, cataracts, other causes of falling vision, Alzheimer’s   disease 
UNIT-II                                                                                           14 hours 
A.CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES: 
Outline the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of the following disorders: 
a. Heart failure. 
b. Rheumatic fever. 
c. Infective endocarditis. 
d. ischemic heart disease. 
e. Hypertension. 
f. congenital heart diseases :ASD ,VSD, Fallots Tetra logy, PDA 
g. Pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary  infarction. 
h. Peripheral vascular diseases 
B. RESPIRATORY DISEASES: 
Outline the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of the following disorders: 
a. Common conditions like bronchitis, pneumonia, tuberculosis, bronchiectasis, Emphysema 
and lung abscess. 
B. Pleural diseases like pleural effusion, empyema, pneumothorax and hydropneumothorax. 
c. Obstructive airway diseases like bronchial asthma, COPD and cystic fibrosis. 
D. Interstitial lung diseases. 
E. Occupational lung diseases. 
f. Chest wall deformities: funnel chest, pigeon chest, barrel chest, kyphoscoliosis of Thoracic 
spine. 
g. Introduction to intensive respiratory care 
UNIT-III                                                                                          12 hours 
PHARMACOLOGY 
Introduce the students to basic pharmacology of various common medications used and their 
effects on patients at rest and during physical activity. 
I. General Pharmacology: 
a.Terminology (definitions) 
b.Routes of drug administration 
pharmacokinetics. (brief) 
pharmacodynamics 
e.Adverse drug effects. (reaction) 
f.Treatment of drug poisoning 
II.Drug acting on ANS: 
a.Cholinergic drugs 
b.Anti-cholinergic drugs 
c.Adrenergic drugs 
d.Anti-adrenergic drugs 
III.Drugs acting on peripheral nervous system: 
a.  skeletal muscle relaxants 
b.Local anaesthetics 
IV.Drugs acting on CNS: 
a. Anaesthetics 
b.Anti-epileptics 
c.Anti-parkinsonism drugs 
d.Anti psychotics 
V.Drugs acting on respiratory system: 
a.Drugs used for cough and asthma 
VI. Drugs acting on CVS: 
a.Anti-hypertensive drugs 
b.Anti-anginal and myocardial infarction drugs 
c.Drugs used to treat CHF (congestive heart failure) 
VII.Drug effects of endocrine system: 
a.Growth hormone 
b.Thyroid hormone 
c.Insulin 
d.Corticosteroids 
VIII.Chemotherapy: 
a.Penicillin 
b.Quinolones 
c.Anti T.B. drugs 
d.Antileprotics 
e.Anti-malarial drugs 
IX.Others 
a. Diuretics 
b. Anti-emetics 
UNIT-IV                                                                                        8 hours 
PAEDIATRICS 
 1.Describe the growth and development of a child from birth to 12 years, including physical, 
social, adaptive development. 
2.List the maternal and neonatal factors contributing to hig risk pregnancy and the neonate; 
inherited diseases; maternal infection - viral and bacterial; maternal diseases incidental to 
pregnancy, such as gestational diabetes, pregnancy-induced hypertension; chronic maternal 
diseases such as heart disease, renal failure, tuberculosis, diabetes, epilepsy, bleeding in the 
mother at any trimester. 
Appropriate management of high risk pregnancies, prevention of neonatal and postnatal 
infections, metabolic problems,outline prevention. 
3.Briefly describe community programmes: International (WHO), national and local for 
prevention of poliomyelitis, blindness, deafness, mental retardation and hypothyroidism. 
Outline the immunization schedule for children. 
4.Cerebral Palsy: Define and briefly outline prenatal, perinatal and postnatal etiology, briefly 
mention pathogenesis, types of cerebral palsy (classification), findings on examination: 
general examination, examination of C.N.S., musculoskeletal system, respiratory system, 
gastro intestinal tract and nutritional status. 
Briefly outline associated defects: Mental retardation, microcephaly, blindness, hearing and 
speech impairments, squint and convulsions. Briefly outline treatment and prevention. 
5.Spina bifida, meningomyelocele: Outline development; clinical features-lower limbs, 
bladder and bowel control; complications - U.T.I. & hydrocephalus; medical treatmentand 
surgical treatment 
UNIT-V                                                                                               8hours 
1.Muscular dystrophy: outline various forms, modes of inheritance and clinical manifestation; 
physical findings in relation to disabilities, progression of various forms and prognosis. 
Describe treatment goals in fatal and nonfatal forms. 
2.Acute C.N.S. infections: Classify (bacterial and viral) and outline the acute illness, C.N.S. 
sequelae leading to mental retardation, blindness, deafness, speech defect, motor paralysis, 
bladder and bowel problems, seizure disorder and specific problems such as subdural 
effusion, hydrocephalus, pressure sores, feeding difficulties. 
3. Stills disease: Classification, pathology in brief, physical findings, course & prognosis. 
Outline treatment, prevention and correction of deformity 
4.Lung infections: Outline the clinical finding, complications and medical treatment of 
bronchiectasis, lung abscess and bronchial asthma 
5. Normal diet of newborn and child: List dietary calories, fat, protein, mineral and vitamin 
requirement in a normal child and in a child with malnutrition. Classify andoutlineetiology, 
findings and treatment of Rickets: Vitamin D deficiency and Vit.Dresistant rickets. 
Course Outcomes: 
1: Introduce the students to basic pharmacology of various common medications used and 
their Effects on patients at rest and during physical activity 
2: The student will be able to explain the growth and development of a child 
3: The student will be able to List the maternal and neonatal factors contributing to high-risk 
pregnancy and the neonate 
4.Student learn about the various infectious diseases and diseases of bones and joints, 
metabolic diseases 
5.Gain knowledge of cardiorespiratory diseases. 
Text books: 
1.Essentials of Pediatrics - O.P.Ghai. 
2.Text book of Pharmacology — Tripati 
3.Principles and Practice of Medicine — Davidson. 
Reference books: 
1.Physiotherapy in Pediatrics: Shepherd 
2.Pharmacology for Physiotherapist - K.AshokShenoy& K V Ramesh 
3.Text Book Pharmacology for Physiotherapist –PadmajaUday Kumar. 
4.Illustrated Pharmacology — Lippincott. 
5.Medicine for students and Practitioners — K.Chaudhury. 
 
 
BPTT3502                         General surgery/OBG                                            L T P C 
                                                                                                                              2  0  0  2 
Course Description: 
This course covers relevant aspects of General Surgery, and Gynaecology & Obstetrics 
Course Objectives: 
1: The student will be able to demonstrate a general understanding of the diseases that 
therapists would encounter in their practice. 
2: They should have a brief idea of the etiology and pathology, patient’s symptoms and 
resultant functional disability. This would help the candidates to understand the limitations 
imposed by the diseases on any therapy that may be prescribed. 
3: Particular effort is to be made to avoid over-burdening the student with clinical signs and 
diagnostic methods except in certain specific diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, other 
diseases of bones and joints, diseases of respiratory, cardiovascular and nervous systems 
requiring specific attention of physiotherapist. 
4: Broad outline of goals of pharmacological and surgical therapy should be given in those 
diseases in which physical therapy will be an important component of overall treatment. 
5.Gain knowledge about the depth of burns and deformities due to burns. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                    8 hours 
1.Describe abdominal surgical incisions. 
2.Outline the post operative complications in: Nephrectomy, Appendicectomy, 
Herniorrhaphy, mastectomy, Thyroidectomy, Colostomy, Adrenalectomy, Cystectomy, 
Hysterectomy, prostatectomy, Cholecystectomy, Ileostomy. 
UNIT-II                                                                                              8 hours 
1.Classify burns by depth and surface area; outline the causes, medical management and 
precautions in the acute stage. 
2.List the potential deformities due to burns, methods of prevention and precautions. Mention 
cosmetic and functional treatment measures. 
3.Outline the plastic surgery procedures and management in rehabilitation of burns, including 
splinting methods for common deformities and prevention of burns contractures. 
UNIT-III                                                                                           4 hours 
1.Review the anatomy of the female pelvis and embryonic and fetal development. 
2.Outline the physiological skeletal changes during pregnancy, delivery and postpartum 
period 
UNIT-IV                                                                                             6 hours 
1.Describe an antenatal programme in preparation for labour. 
2.Outline the mechanism of labour and postnatal management after normal delivery, forceps 
delivery and caesarian sections. 
UNIT-V                                                                                               4 hours 
1.Complications of child birth — outline. 
2.Outline the pre-disposing factors of stress incontinence and prolapse uterus. 
Course Outcomes: 
1.Student learn various surgeries and their complications. 
2. Learn about the potential deformities to burns and role of physiotherapy in prevention of 
contractures. 
3.Gain knowledge about various physiological changes during pregnancy. 
4.Learn about the anti-natal and post Natal programme 
5.Understand the predisposing factors for stress incontinence and prolapse Uterus. 
Text books: 
1.Text book of general surgical conditions: Cash. 
2.Physiotherapy in Obstetrics &Gynecology – Polden 
3.Physiotherapy in Obstetrics and Gynecology - Jill Mantle. 
Reference books:  
1.Essentials of Surgery -S.B.Agarwal. 
2.Burn Care - David N Hemdon. 
3.Text Book of Physiotherapy for Obstetric and Gynaecological conditions - G.B. Madhuri 
 
 
 
 
          CLINICAL ORTHOPEDIC CONDITIONS FOR PHYSIOTHERAPISTS 
BPTT3503                                                                                                                 L T P C  
                                                                                                                                   3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
Following the basic science and clinical science courses this course introduces the 
students to the orthopaedic conditions which commonly cause disability. Particular efforts are 
to be made to avoid burdening the student with any detail pertaining to diagnosis which will 
not contribute to their understanding of the limitations imposed by orthopaedic pathology on 
the functioning of the individual. 
Course Objectives: 
1.The student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of orthopaedic conditions causing 
disability and their management. 
2.Student will be able to gain knowledge of principles of treatment procedures in 
orthopaedics. 
3.Basic knowledge of fractures dislocations and implants. 
4.Learn about infectious bone diseases. 
5.Learn about congenital deformities. 
UNIT-I                                                                                              12 hours 
A. INTRODUCTION TO ORTHOPEDICS: 
Introduction to orthopedic terminology, common orthopedic diseases dealt with, clinical 
examination, common investigations. Radiological and imaging technics in orthopedics. 
B. PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT PROCEDURES IN ORTHOPEDICS: 
1.Non operative procedures: 
•Splints 
•Tractions 
Their indications, usage, limitations. 
2.Operative procedures:List indications, contraindications, and briefly Outline the principles 
of 
•Soft tissue release operations 
•Tendon transfers 
•Osteotomy 
•Arthrodesis 
C.BASIC KNOWLEDGE OF IMPLANTS: 
Wires, pins, nails, rods, plate and screws, external fixators and Illizarov fixator. 
D.SPORTS INJURIES AND MANAGEMENT: 
1.Sprains and Muscle Strains: List common sites of sprains and muscle strains and describe 
the clinical manifestations and treatment with special reference to ankle, knee and shoulder. 
2.Internal derangements of knee Joint: Meniscal injuries and injuries of the cruciate 
ligaments. 
E. FRACTURES & DISLOCATIONS: 
General Principles. 
1.Fractures, dislocations and subluxation — classifications of fractures with respect to 
etiological fractures, geometrycommunication to the environment. 
2.General & local signs & symptoms of fractures & dislocations. 
3.Outlines of management principles of fractures & dislocations:  
Reduction procedures — immobilization procedures — plaster of paris application and 
complications — functional cast bracing — various internal fixations. 
4.Outline of prevention & treatment of complications of fractures including fracture disease, 
Volkmann’s ischemic contracture, Sudecks osteodystrophy, avascular necrosis, stiffness of 
the joints Carpal Tunnel syndrome, myositis ossificans, and shoulder hand syndrome. 
5.Fracture healing — Factors influencing fracture healing. 
UNIT-II                                                                                           12 hours 
A. UPPER LIMB FRACTURES & DISLOCATIONS: 
1.Enumerate all major long bond fractures and joint injuries of upper limb. 
2.Brief description of the clinical features, principles of management and complications 
should be limited to the following fractures: Shoulder dislocations, surgical neck of humerus 
fracture, fracture greater tuberosity, fracture shaft of humerus, supracondylar fracture 
humerus, elbow dislocations, monteggia fracture, forearm bone fractures, Colles’s fracture, 
scaphoid fractures. 
B. LOWER LIMB FRACTURES & DISLOCATIONS: 
1.Enumerate all major long bone fractures and joint injuries of lower limb. 
2.Brief description of the clinical features, principles of management and complications 
should be limited to the following fractures. Dislocations of the hip, intracapsular fracture 
neck of femur, extra capsular fracture neck of femur, fracture shaft of femur, supracondylar 
fracture femur, fracture patella, condylar fractures of lower end of femur and upper end of 
tibia, fracture shaft of tibia, ankle fractures, fracture of the calcaneum and fracture of the 5th 
metatarsal bone. 
C.SPINAL FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS: 
Outline the mechanism, clinical features, principles of management and complicationsof 
spinal injuries. 
UNIT-III                                                                                             8 hours 
A. HAND INJURIES: 
Outline the clinical features, management and complications of: skin and soft tissue injury, 
tendon injury, bone and joint injury — Bennets fracture — mallet finger. 
B. RECURRENT DISLOCATIONS: 
Outline the mechanism, clinical features, principles of management and complications of 
recurrent dislocation of the shoulder and patella. 
C.PERIPHERAL NERVE INJURIES: 
Outline the clinical features and management, including reconstructive surgery on: 
1.Radial, median and ulnar nerve lesions. 
2.Sciatic and lateral popliteal nerve lesions. 
3.Brachial plexus injuries including Erbs, Klumpkes crutch palsy. 
D.AMPUTATIONS: 
1.Classify amputations, list indications for surgery. 
2.Outline pre-operative, operative and prosthetic management. 
3.Outline prevention and treatment or complications. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                    6 hours 
A.BONE& JOINT INFECTIONS: 
Outline the etiology, clinical features, management and complications of: 
•Acute osteomyelitis 
Chronic osteomyelitis 
Septic arthritis 
•Tuberculosis of hip, knee and spine 
B. BONE& JOINT TUMORS: 
General account of classification, clinical features and management of  
benign and malignant bone tumours. Only general principles are to be  
gives; study of specific individual bone tumours is not essential. 
C.MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS: 
Clinical features and management of Painful are syndrome 
Tennis elbow Plantar fasciitis 
D. LEPROSY: 
Orthopedic affections of leprosy which include outlines of clinical features and management 
of claw hand, foot drop, trophic ulcers. 
UNIT-V                                                                                 7 hours 
A. CHRONIC ARTHRITIS: 
Outline the pathology, clinical features, mechanism of deformities, management and 
complications of: Rheumatoid arthritis, Osteoarthritis of major joints and spine, Ankylosing 
spondylitis. 
O.SPINAL DEFORMITIES: 
Classify spinal deformities and outline the salient clinical features,  
management and complications. 
P.POLIOMYELITIS: 
Outline the management of residual paralysis including use of orthosis, and principles of 
muscle transfers. 
Q.CONGENITAL DEFORMITIES: 
Outline the clinical features and management of CTEV, CDH flat foot,  
vertical talus, limb deficiency, spina bifida, meningomyelocele and wry neck. 
R. EVALUATION OF LOW BACK ACHE: 
Etiological factors of LBA — prolapsed intervertebral disc, spondylitis, spondylolisthesis, 
lumbar canal stenosis. 
Course Outcomes: 
1.The student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of orthopaedic conditions causing 
disability and their management. 
2.Student will be able to gain knowledge of principles of treatment procedures in 
orthopaedics. 
3.Basic knowledge of fractures dislocations and implants. 
4.Learn about infectious bone diseases. 
5.Learn about congenital deformities. 
Text books: 
1.Text book of Orthopaedics by Dr.M.Natarajam 
2.Text book of Orthopaedics — John Ebnezar. 
Reference books: 
1.System of orthopaedics by Graham Apley 
2.Clinical Orthopaedics by Richardson 
3.Outline of Orthopaedics — Adams 
4.Outline of Fractures — Adams. 
5.Orthopedics and fractures — Ronald MC Rae. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHYSIOTHERAPY FOR ORTHOPEDIC CONDITIONS 
BPTT3504                                                                                                                      L T P C 
                                                                                                                                        4 09 8.5 
Course Description: 
This course serves to integrate the knowledge gained by the students in clinical 
orthopaedics with skills gained in exercise therapy, electrotherapy and massage, thus 
enabling them to apply these in clinical situations of dysfunction due to musculoskeletal 
pathology. 
Course Objectives: 
1.The student will be able to identify disability due to musculoskeletal dysfunction 
2.Assess, evaluate, diagnosedisability due to musculoskeletal dysfunction 
3.Set treatment goals and apply their skills in exercise therapy, electrotherapy and massage in 
clinical situations to restore musculoskeletal function. 
4.Understand the Principles of Physiotherapy Management in Fractures. 
5.Learn about Biomechanical principles of orthotics &prosthetic appliances. 
UNIT-I                                                                                             14 hours 
(A)Physiotherapy Assessment of Patient with Orthopedic conditions (Peripheral & vertebral) 
with relevant special tests. 
Describe briefly the general and PT assessment of the vertebral column: Subjective 
examination history, occupation, symptoms, major problems; 
Objective Examination 
1.Observation of body type, musculature, deformity & gait. 
2. Palpation — Temperature, swelling, bony prominences, local tenderness. 
3. Postural evaluation using a plumb line. 
4. Active movements of the vertebral column — flexion, extension, lateral flexion and 
rotation. 
Specific tests: straight leg raising, prone knee bend, passive neck flexion, Kernigs sign. 
5. Proximal joints of pelvic and shoulder girdles. 
6. Neurological tests for muscle strength, sensation and reflexes. 
(C)Poliomyelitis 
Review of clinical presentation, investigations, medical & surgical management, 
physiotherapy orthopaedics assessment & management prior to and after surgical 
interventions, reconstructive surgeries with emphasis on tendon transfers. Role of orthotics, 
floor reaction orthosis (FRO), post-polio syndrome. 
(D)Leprosy 
(B)Principles of interpretation of Physiotherapy orthopaedic Examination finding & selection 
of appropriate physiotherapy techniques. 
(B)Cerebral palsy 
Review of clinical presentation, investigations, medical & surgical management, 
physiotherapy orthopaedic assessment & management for surgically and conservatively 
managed cases. 
Review of clinical presentation, investigations, medical & surgical management, 
physiotherapy orthopedic assessment &management prior to and after surgical interventions 
(tendon transfers). Risks of anesthetic limb and outline its care to prevent complications. 
UNIT-II                                                                                           12 hours 
(A)Principles of Physiotherapy Management in Fractures. 
Guidelines of treatment of fracture during immobilization period and mobilization period. 
Review the mechanism of injury, clinical features, treatment and complications and describe 
the PT management and home programme for the following injuries: 
1. Fracture clavicle, upper 1/3 of humerus, shaft of humerus, supra and inter condylar 
fractures of the humerus. 
2. Fracture head of radius, olecranon process, shafts of radius and ulna, Colls. 
3.Fracture scaphoid, Bennetts and metacarpal, neck 
4.Fracture pelvis, neck, trochanter and shaft of femur, supracondylar fracture and injuries of 
the knee joint & patella. 
5. Fracture proximal tibia, both bones of leg, Potts and Dupuytren’s, calcaneum 
andmetatarsal. 
6. Dislocation of (a) Hip: congenital, traumatic, posterior & central (b) \ Shoulder: anterior & 
recurrent (c) Patella. 
(B)Specific fractures and dislocationsPhysiotherapy assessment & management of upper limb 
fractures and dislocations, lower limb fractures and dislocations including pelvis and spinal 
fractures. 
UNIT-III                                                                                            10 hours 
(A)Deformities 
Review of clinical presentation, investigations, medical & surgical management, 
Physiotherapy assessment & management for the following conditions. 
(1) CTEV 
(2) CDH 
(3) Torticollis 
(4) Scoliosis 
(5) Kyphosis 
(6) Lordosis 
 (7)Coxavara 
(8) Genu varum 
(9) Genuvalgum 
(10) Genu recurvatum 
(11)Pesplanus 
(12)Pescavus 
(H)Spinal conditions 
Review of clinical presentation, investigations, medical & surgical management, 
B.Physiotherapy assessment & management and home program for the following 
(1) Cervical spondylosis 
(2) Lumbar spondylosis 
(3) Spondylolisthesis 
(4) Spinal canal stenosis 
(5) Spondylosis 
(6) IVDP 
(7) Coccydynia 
(8) Sacro-iliac joint dysfunction 
(9) Sacralization 
(10) Lumbarization 
UNIT-IV                                                                                           10 hours 
(A)Degenerative and inflammatory conditions 
Review of clinical presentation, investigations, medical & surgical management, 
Physiotherapy assessment & management of the following. 
(1) Osteoarthritis of knee 
(2) Osteoarthritis of hip 
(3) Osteoarthritis of hand 
(4) Rheumatoid arthritis 
(5) Ankylosing spondylitis 
(6) Gout 
(7) Perthes disease 
(8) Osteoporosis 
(9)Haemophilia 
(B)Infective conditions — 
Review of clinical presentation, investigations, medical & surgical management, 
Physiotherapy assessment & management for the following. 
(1) Osteomyelitis — acute & chronic 
(2) Septic arthritis 
(3) Pyogenic arthritis 
 (4) TB spine 
5)TB knee 
(6) TB hip 
UNIT-V                                                                                             14 hours 
(A) Introduction to Bioengineering — 
a. Classification of orthotics & prosthetics. 
Biomechanical principles of orthotics&prosthetic appliances. 
C.Designing of upper extremity & lower extremity prosthesis 
D.Indications& contraindications 
E.Advantages& disadvantages of orthosis& prosthesis. 
F.Checkout of orthosis& prosthesis. 
G.Footwear prescription & modifications. 
(B)Amputations- 
(1)Definition 
(2)Types 
(3)Levels 
(4)Indications 
(5)Physiotherapy assessment 
(6)Aims 
(7)Management: pre &post operative 
(8) Physiotherapy with emphasis on stump care & bandaging 
(9) Ideal stump 
(10) Pre& post prosthetic training 
(11) Prosthetic checkout 
(12) Pylon 
(13) Complications of amputation & their management 
(C) Orthopaedic surgeries 
i. Brief overview of surgical procedure and technique of the following common orthopedic 
surgeries such as — open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), arthroplasty-types, 
osteotomy, reconstructive surgeries, tendon transplants with emphasis on hand injures, soft 
tissue release-types, soft tissue repair, arthrodesis, arthroscopy, synovectomy, spinal 
decompression, spinal stabilization, reattachment of limbs, external fixators.  
ii.Pre and postoperative PT assessment, goals, precautions and PT management of above
mentioned surgeries. Pre and postoperative PT management of common surgeries of 
shoulder, elbow, forearm, wrist, hand, hip, knee, ankle and foot with emphasis on TKR, 
THR, and ACL reconstruction surgery protocols. 
(D)Sports physiotherapy and soft tissue conditions 
i.Types of injuries to soft tissue (ligaments, muscles, tendons, nerves, capsule, meniscus, 
bursa etc;), stages of soft tissue healing, treatment guidelines for soft tissue injuries in acute, 
sub acute and chronic stages.  
ii.Prevention and rehabilitation of soft tissue injuries.Periarthritis of shoulder, supraspinatus 
tendinitis, rotator cuff tendinitis and tear, biceps tendonitis, sub acromion bursitis, lateral 
epicondylitis, medial epicondylitis, olecranon bursitis, carpal tunnel syndrome, Dupuytren’s 
contracture, dequervains disease, trigger finger, wry neck, piriformis syndrome, iliotibial tract 
syndrome, knee- ligament and meniscal injuries, quadriceps, hamstring and calf strain, 
chondromalacia patella, patellar tendinitis, pre patellar bursitis, ankle sprain, tendo Achilles 
tendinitis, plantar fasciitis, metatarsalgia, Morton’s neuralgia. 
iii.Role of physiotherapy in prevention and treatment of sports injuries. 
E. Applied yoga in orthopaedic conditions.Brief outline about epiphyseal injuries. 
Course Outcomes: 
1.The student will be able to identify disability due to musculoskeletal dysfunction 
2.Assess, evaluate, diagnose disability due to musculoskeletal dysfunction 
3.Set treatment goals and apply their skills in exercise therapy, electrotherapy and massage in 
clinical situations to restore musculoskeletal function. 
4.Understand the Principles of Physiotherapy Management in Fractures. 
5. Learn about Biomechanical principles of orthotics & prosthetic appliances. 
Text books: 
(1) Cash Text book of orthopedics and rheumatology 
(2)Tidy’s physiotherapy 
(3) Text book of orthopedics for physiotherapist — Jayant Joshi. 
Reference books:  
(1) Sports Medicine — C.S.Jayaprakash. 
(2) Text Book of Sports Medicine — Das. 
(3) Therapeutic exercise — Kisner 
(4) Orthopaedic physical assessment — Magee. 
(5)ClinicalOrthopedic Rehabilitation — Brent & Brotzman. 
 
PHYSICAL FUNCTION AND DIAGNOSIS 
BPTT3505                                                                                                          L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
Physical and Functional Diagnosis focuses on the basic assessment skills for physical 
and Functional diagnosis i.e. Musculoskeletal, Neurological and Cardiovascular-Respiratory 
in order to study the various impairments and their impact on activity and participation of the 
individual Understand the use of appropriate tools or instruments of assessment for diagnosis 
in various diseases and disorders including musculoskeletal, neurological and cardio-vascular 
pulmonary conditionsUnderstand the use of diagnosis for physiotherapy practice. 
To learn the applied aspect of the subject for physiotherapy practice. 
Course Objectives: 
1:Acquire fundamental and advanced knowledge in Physical and Functional diagnosis 
2: Formulate and prescribe specific treatment plans for the people with cardiac, pulmonary, 
Orthopaedic, Neurological and Paediatric disorders. 
3: Conduct a comprehensive physiotherapy intervention safely and competently  
4: Monitor and reassess the patient progress and modify treatment plan 
5:Use problem solving principles and evidence-based practice in decision making in 
assessment and management of patients 
UNIT-I                                                                                               4 hours 
1. Introduction of physical and functional diagnosisPhysical Diagnosis and its importance in 
clinical practiceFunctional Diagnosis and its importance in clinical practice 
2. Subjective examination including Name, age, sex, height, weight, BMI, address, 
occupation, chief complain, present history, past history, personal history, history of 
hospitalization,medical and surgical history, family history, etc.. 
3.Assessment of Pain: with techniques and clinical reasoning 
Types of pain: Somatic, referred, Neurogenic, Visceral, etc. 
Location, duration, progressive or non-progressive, localize or generalize, 
distribution, quality, diurnal variations, Modifying factors, Severity, nature ofpain, tissue 
irritabilityMeasurement and DocumentationVisual Analogue Scale (VAS), NumericalRating 
Scale(N.R.S.) 
McGill’s modified questionnaire (including Body charts)Loss of function 
Developing Differential Diagnosis (DD) 
UNIT-II                                                                                     9 hours 
Objective examination 
Vitals parameter - PR, RR, BP, Temp, Hydrates 
Level of consciousness, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), Higher mental function(time, place, 
person, etc...) mental status, communication, memory, cognitive,Cranial Nerves Examination 
Systemic examination PICCKLE 
Inspection (LOOK): with techniques and clinical reasoning 
Body built, Posture, swelling, wasting, perspiration, breathing pattern, 
deformity, asymmetry, tropical changes, and symmetry of structure. 
Lines and tube attached with the patients including external appliance,assistive devices, 
footwear. 
Palpation (FEEL): with techniques and clinical reasoning 
Tenderness, swelling / oedema, temperature, asymmetry, spasm, 
Surface contour, tautness 
Auscultation: 
Techniques with Clinical Reasoning, Breath sounds, Heart sounds. 
Percussion e.g. thorax and abdominal 
UNIT-III                                                                                 16 hours 
Examination: 
Sensory examination: with techniques and clinical reasoning,Superficial ,deep and cortical 
sensation examination, Dermatome Examination techniquesand clinical reasoning 
Motor Examination: with techniques and clinical reasoning 
Muscles Girth, wasting – Atrophy and Hypertrophy 
Muscles Tone: Normal, hypo and hypertonic 
Modified Ashworth scale 
Myotomes - Examination techniques and clinical reasoning 
Reflex : Deep and superficial reflex 
Muscles Power: Muscle grading / manual muscle testing (MMT) 
1.Introduction, Principles 
2.Uses, Precaution and Contraindication 
3.Types of muscle grading 
4.Available ROM method 
5.Grading system - Medical Research Council (MRC) 
6.Demonstrate the skill to grade 
Head, Face, neck, shoulder and Upper limb muscle 
Trunk muscle, pelvic muscles including respiratory muscles 
Lower limb muscle 
Chest Expansion Measurement:  
Chest Circumference Hemi thorax, Book method, chest symmetry, etc. 
Limb Length Measurement 
Q- Angle Measurement with techniques and clinical reasoning 
Tightness, Contracture and Deformity 
UNIT-IV                                                                                  7 hours 
Balance tests: Clinical importance with techniques and clinical reasoning, Romberg test, 
Hall pike test,Functional reach test etc 
Coordination tests with techniques and clinical reasoning Equilibrium and non-equilibrium 
tests 
Coordination Tests in Standing, Walking, Sitting or Supine, Finger to nose, Finger to 
therapist finger, Finger to  
finger, Alternate nose to finger, Finger opposition, Pronation /Supination, Alternate heel to 
knee, Drawing an  
imaginary circle on air with UE and LE, etc. 
Gait Measurement with techniques and clinical reasoning Normal and abnormal gait, Gait 
parameters  
assessment procedures Gait Evaluation and demonstrate Pathologic gait examination 
Description of some of the most commonly used types of observational gait analysis; 
Advantages and  
disadvantages. 
Functional Diagnosis – measures – Basics  
Functional Activity Specific Assessment – FIM, ADLs scales 
Assessment of health and wellness 
Functional evaluation: ICIDH, ICIDH2 and ICF - brief 
The concepts of health status impairment; functional limitations; disability and handicap; 
definition of  
functional activity and the purposes and components of the functional assessment 
UNIT-V                                                                                     9 hours 
Special Outcome measures for Cardiovascular and pulmonary system  
Breath Holding Test, Rate of Perceived Exertion (R.P.E.) 
Target Heart Rate (RHT), 6-minute walk test, 3-minute walk test, 2-minute walk test 
Outcome measures for Musculoskeletal system examination with techniques and clinical 
reasoning - 
Techniques with clinical reasoning Low Back Functional Scale (LBFS), Neck Disability 
Index (NDI) 
Outcome measures for Neuromuscular system examination with techniques and clinical 
reasoning  
10 meter walk test, Time up and go test (TUG), Get up and go test (GUG), MASS, STREAM 
Course Outcomes: 
1: Acquire fundamental and advanced knowledge in Physical and Functional diagnosis 
2: Formulate and prescribe specific treatment plans for the people with cardiac, pulmonary, 
Orthopaedic, Neurological and Pediatric disorders. 
3: Conduct a comprehensive physiotherapy intervention safely and competently CO4: 
Monitor and reassess the patient progress and modify treatment plan 
4: Use problem solving principles and evidence-based practice in decision making in 
assessment and management of patients 
5: Identify the scope and limitations of professional practices, manage appropriately. 
Text books: 
1.Orthopedic Physical Assessment, Magee DJ. 5th edition. Saunders 
2.Hand Rehabilitation- A practical Guide. 2nd edition. Clark GL. Churchill Livingstone 
3. Muscles: Testing and Function, with Posture and Pain: 5th edition. Kendall FP; McCreary 
EK et al. Lippincott Williams and  
Wilkins 
Reference books: 
1. Practical Exercise Therapy: 3rd edition. Hollis M; Cook PF. Wiley-Blackwell 
2. Training in the Community for the people with disabilities. Goerdt et al. World Health 
Organization 
3. Physiotherapy for Respiratory and Cardiac Problems. Adults and Paediatrics. 3rd ed. Pryor 
JA, Webber BA. London:  
Churchill Livingstone, 2002. 
4. Training in the Community for the people with disability – Hallender Padmini Mendes 
Hand Rehabilitation - Clark W. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CLINICAL NEUROLOGY FOR PHYSIOTHERAPISTS 
BPTT3506                                                                                                                  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces the students to the neurological conditions which commonly 
cause disability. Particular effort is to be made to avoid burdening the student with any detail 
pertaining to diagnosis which will not contribute to their understanding of the limitations 
imposed by neurological pathology on the functioning of the individual 
Course Objectives: 
1: The student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of neurological conditions 
causing disability and their management. 
2.Student will learn Clinical assessment of neurological function 
3.Gain knowledge about neural pathology, clinical features  
4.Learn about infectious and degenerative diseases of nervous system. 
5.Gain knowledge about radiographic diagnosis, medical management. 
UNIT-I                                                                                   8hours 
A.NEURO ANATOMY: 
i. Review the basic anatomy of the brain and spinal cord including: blood supply of the brain 
and spinal cord, anatomy of the visual pathway, connections of the cerebellum and 
extrapyramidal systemrelationship of the spinal nerves to the spinal cord segments. Long 
tracts of the spinal cord, the brachial and lumbar plexuses, and cranial nerves. 
B.NEUROPHYSIOLOGY: 
i.Review the structure and function of 
a) neuron b) synapse c) supporting tissue. 
ii.Organization and function of: 
a) cerebral hemispheres  
b) cerebellum  
c) spinal cord  
d) peripheral nerves  
e) pyramidal system  
f) extra pyramidal system 
iii.Review in brief the neurophysiological basis of learning, motor control, motor learning: 
tone and disorders of tone and posture, bladder control, muscle contraction and movement 
and pain. 
C.ASSESSMENT: 
Clinical assessment of neurological function to be taught through bedside demonstration of 
clinics. 
1.Basic history taking to determine whether the brain, spinal cord or peripheral nerve is 
involved. 
2.Assessment of higher mental function such as orientation, memory, attention, speech and 
language. 
3.Assessment of cranial nerves. 
4.Assessment of motor power. 
5.Assessment of sensory function: touch, pain and position 
6.Assessment of tone: spasticity, rigidity and hypotonia. 
7.Assessment of cerebellar function. 
8.Assessment of higher cortical function — apraxia etc. 
9.Assessment of gait abnormalities. 
10.Assessment of ADL activity 
11.Functional status of individual with neurological dysfunction 
UNIT-II                                                                                               8 hours 
1.Vestibular disorders 
2.Congenital and childhood disorders. 
a.Cerebral palsy 
b.Hydrocephalus 
c.Spina bifida 
3.Movement disorders — dystonia, chorea, ballismus, athetosis, tics,myoclonus and wilsons 
disease. 
4.Cerebellar lesions — ataxia, Friedreich’s hereditary, cerebellar ataxia &Tabes dorsalis 
UNIT-III 9hours 
1.Demyelinating diseases (central and peripheral) 
a.Guillian — Barre syndrome 
b.Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. 
c.Transverse myelitis. 
d.Multiple sclerosis. 
2.Degenerative disorders. 
a.Parkinsons disease. 
b.Dementia 
3.Infections 
a.Pyogenic meningitis sequelae. 
b.Tuberculous infection of central nervous system. 
c.Poliomyelitis. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                             12 hours 
1.Cerebrovascular accidents. 
   a. General classification, thrombotic, embolic, haemorrhagic & inflammatory strokes. 
b. Gross localization and sequelae. 
c. Detailed rehabilitative programme 
2.Trauma — broad localization, first aid and management of sequelae of head injury and  
spinal cord injury. 
3.Diseases of the spinal cord. 
a. Craniovertebral junction anomalies. 
b. Syringomyelia 
c. Cervical and lumbar disc disease. 
d. Tumours 
e. Spinal arachnoiditis 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                          8 hours 
1.Diseases of the muscle: classification, signs, symptoms, progression and management. 
2.Peripheral nerve disorders. 
a. Peripheral nerve injuries: localization and management 
b.Entrapment neuropathies. 
c.Peripheral neuropathies. 
3.Miscellaneous. 
a.Epilepsy; definition, classification and management 
b.Myasthenia Gravis: definition, course and management 
c. Intracranial tumours: broad classification, signs and symptoms. 
d.Motor neuron disease. 
e.Management of unconscious patient 
f.Management of Japanese encephalitis. 
Course Outcomes: 
1:The student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of neurological conditions 
causing disability and their management. 
2.Student will learn Clinical assessment of neurological function 
3.Gain knowledge about neural pathology , clinical features  
4.Learn about infectious and degenerative diseases of nervous system. 
5.Gain knowledge about radiographic diagnosis ,medical management. 
Text books: 
1.Davidsons principles and practice of medicine. 
2.Neurology and neuro surgery illustrated -Lindsay 
3.Brains diseases of nervous system. 
Reference books: 
1.Neuro Anatomy — Inderbir Singh. 
2.Clinical Neuro Anatomy — Vishram Singh. 
3.Clinical Neuro Physiology — U.K. Misra. 
4.Neurological Examination — Robert J. Schwartzman. 
5.Neurological Differential Diagnosis — John Patten. 
6.ABC of Spinal Cord Injury — David Grundy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHYSIOTHERAPY IN NEUROLOGICAL CONDITIONS 
      BPTT3507                                                                                                            L T  P  C                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                     4 0 98.5 
Course Description: 
This course serves to integrate the knowledge gained by the students in clinical 
neurology with the skills gained in exercise therapy, electrotherapy and massage, thus 
enabling them to apply these in clinical situations of dysfunction due to pathology in the 
nervous system. 
Course Objectives: 
1.The student will be able to identify disability due to neurological dysfunction, 2.The student 
will be able to set treatment goals and apply their skills in exercise therapy, electrotherapy 
and massage in clinical situation to restore neurological function. 
3.Gain knowledge in various therapeutic approaches in the management of sensory 
abnormalities. 
4.Gain knowledge in various therapeutic approaches in the management of abnormal muscle 
tone in various neurological disorders. 
5.Describe and demonstrate the treatment of motor disabilities. 
UNIT-I                                                                                             14 hours 
i.Review the factors influencing alpha motor neuron activity.  
ii.Review the neurological basis of muscle tone and movement and demonstrate the 
following:  
a) hypotonia  
b) hypertonia — spasticity and rigidity 
c)ataxia d) athetosis e) chorea. 
B. PRINCIPLES OF ASSESSMENT: 
Review a) skills in history taking b) assessment of higher functions, cortical sensations, 
cranial nerves, dorsal column sensation and pain and temperature sensations c) assessment of 
motor function : grading of muscle poer, assessment of range of movement, balance and 
coordination d) assessment of superficial and deep reflexes e) assessment of reflex maturation 
in terms of stimulus, position, negative / positive reactions and their significance f) 
assessment of gait — both normal and abnormal (spastic, ataxic and paralytic patterns). 
Emphasis should be placed on teaching accurate assessment techniques and various recording 
methods eg.Colourcoding on body charts, graphs etc 
C.PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT: 
Review the treatment principles as follows:- 
a.Sensory re-education: hypersensitivity, hyposensitivity and anaesthesia. 
b.Treatment of altered tone: hypertonicity and hypotonicity 
c.Motor re-education: strengtheningexercises, coordination exercises, joint mobilization 
exercises, uses of equilibrium and labyrinthine system, use of PNF patterns, controlled 
sensory stimulation to bias the spindle cell eg. vibration, tactile, ice etc., use of stretch to 
elicit movement (facilitation), light joint compression (inhibition), use of reflex activity to 
improve motor function, physio genic sequence of motor behaviour. 
d.Treatment to improve functions: free exercises, gait training with and without aids, 
activities of daily living, mat exercises and exercises and recreation. 
e.Review the use of ambulatory aids in neurological conditions: in spastic upper motor 
neuron lesions, in lower motor neuron lesions, in dorsal column dysfunction and cerebellar 
dysfunction. 
f.Review the use of splints and braces in spastic upper motor neuron and flaccid lower motor 
neuron lesions in both upper and lower limb. 
g.Review the management of chronic pain in neurological conditions with respect to the pain, 
treatment modalities available, selection criteria for each modality and possible 
complications. 
h.Vestibular rehabilitation 
i.General principles and selection of orthoses and assistive devices, training of patients with 
orthoses in various neurological conditions. 
UNIT-II                                                                                            10 hours 
A.CEREBRAL PALSY: 
i.Define cerebral palsy and  
ii.Describe the topographical classification — monoplegia, diplegia, paraplegia, hemiplegia 
& tetraplegia.  
iii.Describe types of cerebral palsy; spastic, athetotic, mixed.  
iv.Identify common associated problems: visual, hearing, speech and intelligence. 
v.Assessment: 
•Assess reflex activity at different levels: cortical, mid brain, brain stem, spinal.  
•Assess developmental milestones from birth to five years. Assess functional ability: Prone to 
supine (rolling), crawling to sitting quadripod, crawling, kneeling kneel — stand, stand with 
support and walking.  
•Examine for contractures as follows: hip: flexion, adduction, internal rotation;knee: flexion; 
ankle: plantarflexion, inversion / eversion; flexion contractures of elbow, wrist & fingers and 
spinal deformities. 
•Treatment — Describe and demonstrate the treatment of motor disabilities: passive 
movement, stretching of soft tissue to tightness, use of ice to reduce spasticity, positioning 
the child to prevent soft tissue contractures, to inhibit abnormal reflexes and to facilitate 
rotational movement.  
•Describe and demonstrate techniques of carrying of different types of CP children, 
encouraging bimanual activities in different starting positions like prone, sitting and standing 
and activities across the midline.  
•Describe appropriate home programmes for positioning the child, handling them and 
assisting improvement of function, • introduction to treatment techniques: Bobath, Rood. 
B.Parkinsonism: 
i.Review the natural history, course and prognosis.  - Identify and assess problems in posture, sitting, kneeling and standing balance, voluntary 
and automatic movements,rigidity, tremor and gait.  - Assess also hearing, speech, fingers, dexterity.  -Describe disability grading according to Yalu. 
ii. Demonstrate treatment: postural awareness and relaxation training, gait training, 
techniques; associated reactions, heel-toe gait. Overcoming obstacles, start and stop on 
command, turning and walking backwards, forwards and sidewards.  - Describe an appropriate home exercise programme. 
C.MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY: - Describe stages of the disease: - - ambulatory, wheel chair and bed stages. – - Describe significance of exercises - resistive, active and free. Identify and assess common 
contractures and deformities.  - Assess range of motion and muscle power. Assess functional ability. 
-Demonstrate treatment programme for strengthening weak muscles, active movements and 
hydrotherapy. Increase range of motion by suspension therapy, power board, passive 
stretching. Positioning etc. demonstrate gait training with appropriate orthoses.  - Describe management of chest complications: breathing exercises, chestpercussion, 
drainage of secretions, and assisted coughing 
UNIT-III                                                                                            10 hours 
A.SPINAL CORD LESIONS: - Describe types of spinal cord lesions. – Describe signs of tract and root interruptions.  - Describe positioning of the patient in acute spinal cord injury.  - Describe assessment of the motor system: tone, power of specific muscles, range of motion 
and limb girth.  - Describe the assessment of sensorysystem and reflexes.  - Describeassessment of functional ability and balance reactions in appropriate cases. 
Describe assessment of respiratory function: muscles of respiration, coughing ability and vital 
capacity.  -Describe how the level of lesion is ascertained. 
Treatment:  -Describe the stages of immobilization & stage when loading of the spine is allowed.  -Describe spinal orthosis. Demonstrate motor re-education programs and a program for 
respiratory care in high level paraplegics and quadriplegics 
Demonstrate progressive ambulation, mat exercises, various strengthening programmes, 
methods of decreasing spasticity and improving sitting balance.  -Demonstrate various types of paraplegic gaits and re-education in functional activities; 
transfers and protective falling. -Describe common ambulatory aids used in paraplegics and common splints used in 
tetraplegics.  -Describe the use of hydrotherapy in paraplegics.  -Describe the concept of team approach in rehabilitation of these patients. 
B.MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 
UNIT-IV                                                                                           10 hours 
A.C.V.A. (CEREBRO VASCULAR ACCIDENTS): 
- Define hemiplegia and  - identify the following: Sensory disturbance, alteration in tone, loss of selective movement, 
loss of balance reactions and communication problems. -Treatment: Describe the unilateral and bilateral approaches to treatment. Describe 
positioning in the supine position, on the affected and on the unaffected side.  -Demonstrate activities inthe recumbent position: arm mobilization, trunk elongation, 
scapular movement, arm 
A.C.V.A. (CEREBRO VASCULAR ACCIDENTS): - Define hemiplegia and  - identify the following: Sensory disturbance, alteration in tone, loss of selective movement, 
loss of balance reactions and communication problems. -Treatment: Describe the unilateral and bilateral approaches to treatment. Describe 
positioning in the supine position, on the affected and on the unaffected side.  -Demonstrate activities inthe recumbent position: arm mobilization, trunk elongation, 
scapular movement, arm elevation, activities for a recovering arm: activities for the lower 
limb i.e., hip and knee flexion over the side of the bed, knee extension with dorsiflexion, hip 
control, isolated knee extension. Mat activities: demonstrate rolling on to affected and 
unaffected sides, sitting and kneeling. -Describe the technique of making a patient sit passively and active assisted sitting. -Demonstrate transfer techniques.  
Describe activities in siting: equal weight transference on both buttocks, shuffling on 
buttocks, weight transfer through arms balance, reactions of trunk 
— head.  -Demonstrate activities in the standing position : standing from plinth, from chair (assisted 
and independent), weight bearing on affected leg, knee control in standing, weight transfers 
forwards, backward and side wards, gait training and stair climbing. –Describe tilt board 
activities in the lying and sitting positions.  -Describe additional methods of stimulation using verbal cues, ice, pressure & tapping. -
Describe management of shoulder pain and shoulder hand syndrome.  -Identify and describe a hemiplegic gait, identify synergy components and abnormal reflex 
activities.  -Demonstrate re-education of gait: motor re- learning techniques, functional approach and use 
of orthoses. 
B.PT Management in HEAD INJURIES and  
C.PT Management in MOTOR NEURON DISEASES. 
D.CEREBELLAR LESIONS: - Identify and assess abnormal tone, decomposition of movement, rapid alternate movements, 
pleurosthotonus, proprioception, dysmetria, posture and gait. 
Treatment: Demonstrate exercise for incoordination — Frenkel’s and weighted exercise. 
Demonstrate techniques for re-education of balance and equilibrium reactions by visual 
compensation. -Describe use of appropriate aids for ambulation depending on the severity of affectation — 
walker, elbow crutches, quadruped walking sticks etc., 
UNIT-V                                                                                             12 hours  
A.PERIPHERAL NERVE LESIONS: - Identify types of peripheral nerve lesions.  -Assess the motor system: specific muscles, range of motion, active and passive ranges, 
muscle girth.  -Assess sensory system: touch, pain, temperature, parasthesia, nerve regeneration.  -Assess autonomic function: sweating, skin condition, soft tissue atrophy. Treatment: 
describe muscle re-education techniques: electrical stimulation (selection of current); active, 
assisted, resisted movements; passive education and pain relief by various modalities.  -Describe the common splints used in peripheral nerve lesions; static, dynamic and 
functional, muscle transfers: preparation for transfer assessment of muscle power, stretching 
of soft tissue tightness, post-operative management: pressure bandaging & muscle re
education after transfer.  -Describe a home programme. 
B. POLYNEUROPATHIES 
Evaluation and management of the above condition, history, observation, palpation, motor & 
sensory examination, reflex testing, differential diagnosis, balance and co-ordination 
examination, gait analysis, functions analysis. 
List of problems and complications, short- and long-term goals and management of systemic 
complications and physiotherapy intervention. 
C.GUILLINA — BARRE SYNDROME. 
 
D.POLIOMYELITIS: -Define poliomyelitis and review the stages in the disease, acute recovery and residual 
paralysis.  -Describe treatment in the acute state: heat, chest care, positioning. Describe the assessment 
of a patient in the recovery stage: active and passive range of motion, soft tissue tightness, 
muscle power & spinal deformities. -Demonstrate treatment in the recovery stage: muscle strengthening, progressive resistive 
exercise: active — assisted, active - resistive exercise.  -Describe the role of suspension and hydrotherapy.  -Describe the treatment of soft tissue tightness by passive stretching, auto stretching and 
positioning. -Demonstrate treatment in the stage of residual paralysis, pre-operative assessment of 
contractures: hip flexion, TEL contracture, knee flexion and foot deformities. - Describe also assessment of limb length discrepancy and spinal deformities.  -Review orthotic aids commonly used in themanagement of polio. -Describe tendon transfer 
operations commonly performed.  -Describe functional retraining for self-care, gait training and posturecorrection 
Course outcomes: 
1.The student will be able to identify disability due to neurological dysfunction, 
 2.The student will be able to set treatment goals and apply their skills in exercise therapy, 
electrotherapy and massage in clinical situation to restore neurological function. 
3.Gain knowledge in various therapeutic approaches in the management of sensory 
abnormalities. 
4. Gain knowledge in various therapeutic approaches in the management of abnormal muscle 
tone in various neurological disorders. 
5. Describe and demonstrate the treatment of motor disabilities. 
Text books  
1.Cash Text Book of Neurology for Physiotherapy 
2.Physical Rehabilitation — Assessment and Treatment by Susan B.Os Sullivan Thomas 
J.Schemitz 
Reference books: 
1.Key issues in Neurological physiotherapy — Ada / canning. 
.2.Neurological Examination in clinical practice — John Spillane, Bicker staffs 
3.Neurological Physiotherapy — Susan Edwards. 
4.Steps to follow: The comprehensive treatment of patients with Hemiplegia — Patricia M 
Davies. 
5.Adult hemiplegia — Bobath. 
6’.Physiotherapy in Neuro conditions — Glady Samuel Raj. 
7.Neuromusculo skeletal examination — Nicola J. Petty. 
8.Stroke — Hanley. 
9.Clinical Evaluation and Management of Spasticity — David A Gelber. 
10.Neurological rehabilitation — DancyUmphred. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT3508                           Women’s Health                                                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
The purpose of the course is to analyse, interpret, and assess appropriate exercise regimens 
for women with unique needs, to raise awareness and conduct research in this field, and to 
recognise the importance and knowledge of women's health in the larger community. 
Examine natural physiological changes in women in order to cope with their overall fitness. 
Course Objectives: 
1: To learn about the importance of antenatal fitness . 
2: Develop the exercise prescription knowledge to pregnancy women  - past, present and 
future 
3: Demonstrate advanced physiotherapy  exercise program for sports women 
4: Design the individualized exercise programme for antenatal   women 
5.design of exercises for women undergone gynaecological surgeries 
UNIT-I                                                                                              10hours 
A. Introduction about Women’s Health: 
Health education and health promotion: The Physiotherapist’s role in women’s health. 
Basic Review of Anatomy & Physiology Of female body: Anatomy of pelvic floor muscles 
and the Reproductive organs of the body, Physiology of menstrual cycle –ovulation cycle, 
uterine cycle, duration, Hormonal regulation of menstruation and menstrual disorders, 
Premenstrual disorder and Post-menopausal disorder, Definition, Classification, Etiology, 
Pathogenesis, Clinical Features, Clinical Investigation and Complications. Medical, Surgical 
And Physiotherapy Management (Assessment And Treatment) including Rehabilitation 
UNIT-II                                                                                             12 hours 
A. AntenatalAnd Postnatal: - Diagnosis of Pregnancy,  - Physiological changes during Pregnancy,  - Complications during Pregnancy, Gestational diabetes,  -Normal labour, Physiotherapy during labor, Normal Puerperium, -Antenatal Assessment 
-Prenatal training, Postnatal Assessment,  -Postnatal complications, Postnatal Exercise, Multiple childbirth and Maternal and child care, 
Early paediatric problems, Medical termination of pregnancy and its complications. 
B. Overview of prenatal and postpartum exercise viewpoint / Need & scope. 
The high-risk prenatal patient, pre-existing conditions. 
Hospitals protocols (conception to birth) PhysiotherapyIn Antenatal Period And Labour: 
•Antenatal EXERCISE FIRST TRIMESTER/relaxation /mobility 
•Antenatal Exercise prescription – sedentary, active, athlete’s group indication & 
contradiction (modification as per condition), Antenatal exercises, Aerobic Exercise during 
pregnancy, 
•couple counselling & lifestyle modification to support early pregnancy 
•Pregnancy changes and effects on musculoskeletal and posture/each trimester  ( evaluation 
& exercise prescription ) 
UNIT-III                                                                                          10 hours 
Fitness for athletic pregnant women 
•Antenatal EXERCISE SECOND TRIMESTER/ fit pregnancy 
•Antenatal EXERCISE third TRIMESTER/ Birth preparation 
•EARLY postnatal DAY 1 TO 7 
•Early postpartum, care 
•ASSESSMENT SCALE 
•Post-c-section Recovery plane, after vaginal birth recovery plane & perineum care. 
•Diastasis recti assessment & management. 
•Discussion on Childbirth education classes setup. 
•Postnatal exercise Pilates Based on mat &ball – Basic  
•Late postnatal rehabilitation 
•Postnatal exercise Pilates Based on mat &ball – Basic to modified 
•Discussion the pattern of fat distribution its management  
•Psychological counseling during antenatal & Couple therapy 
UNIT-IV                                                                                      8hours 
A. Urogenital Dysfunctions:  
Prolapse of uterus, Incontinence,  
low backache. 
B.Physiotherapy role in Hysterectomy cases. 
c pelvic floor rehabilitation: - 
Explain various mechanisms and therapeutic techniques and precautions used in pelvic floor 
rehabilitation. 
1.Electrotherapy 
2.Bio feedback 
3.Mobilization & manipulation 
4.Ergonomic advice 
UNIT-V                                                                                            5 hours 
conditions in older women:  
Significant changes during older age in the female body, Anthropometric measurements, 
Obesity during old age, Complications of Ageing, Menopause and the Climacteric, 
Osteopenia and Osteoporosis. 
Course Outcomes: 
1: To learn about the importance of antenatal fitness . 
2: Develop the exercise prescription knowledge to pregnancy women  - past, present and 
future 
3: Demonstrate advanced physiotherapy  exercise program for sports women 
4: Design the individualized exercise programme for antenatal   women 
5.design of exercises for women undergone gynaecological surgeries 
Text books: 
1.Physiotherapy in Obstetrics and Gynaecology. 1st edition. Mantle J, Polden M. 
Butterworth-Heinemann publications 
2. Tidy physiotherapy. 15th edition. Porter S. Elsevier’s Publications. 
3. Tidy physiotherapy 12th edition. Thompson A; Skinner A. Butterworth-Heinemann 
publications 
1.Dc Dutta’s Textbook Of Obstetrics By Hirlal Konar 
2.Howkins & Bourne Shaw's Textbook OfObstetrics By Padubidiri 
3.Management Of Labour By Sabaratnam 
4.Arias” Practical Guide To High Risk Pregnancy And Delivery By Amarnath Bhide, 
Sabaratnam Arulkumaran 
 5.Womens Health- RuthSapsford,Lippincott,1998 
6.Obstetric AndGynecologic Care In Physical Therapy By Rebecca Gourtey Stephenson, 
Linda J. O Connor,2000 
Reference books: 
1.Physiotherapy In Obstetrics And Gynecology-Polden And Mantle, Jaypee Brothers 
2.Womens Health And Fitness Guide-Michele Ketties,2006 
3.Journal Of Women’s Health Physical Therapy 
4.The Association Of Charted Physiotherapist In Women’s Health Journal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT3509                                   COMMUNITY MEDICINE                             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                   3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
This course will enable students to understand the effects of the environment and the 
community dynamics on the health of the individual. 
Course Objectives: 
1:The student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of the influence of social and 
environmental factors on the health of the individual and society. 
2.Learn about the preventable and non preventable diseases  
3.Education about industrial hazards 
4.Measures to take during pandemic disease state. 
5.Knowledge about community based rehabilitation 
UNIT-I                                                                                            15 hours 
A.Outline the natural history of diseases and the influence of social, economic and cultural 
aspects of health and diseases.  
B.Outline the various measures of prevention and methods of intervention especially for 
diseases with disability.  
C.Outline the national care delivery system and the public health administration system at 
central and state level.  
D.Outline selected national health programmes.  
E.Define occupational health and list methods of prevention of occupational diseases and 
hazards.  
F.Outline the employees state insurance scheme and its benefits. 
G.Describe the social security measures for protection from occupational hazards, accidents, 
diseases, and the workman’s compensation Act. 
H.Outline the objectives and strategies of the National Family Welfare Programme. 
I.Define community based and institution-based rehabilitation. Describe the advantages and 
disadvantages of institution and community-based rehabilitation.  
J.Describe the following communicable diseases with reference to reservoir, mode of 
transmission, route of entry and levels of prevention: a) Poliomyelitis b) Meningitis c) 
Encephalitis d) Tuberculosis, e) Filariasis, f) Leprosy g) Tetanus &  h)Measles. 
K.Describe the epidemiology of rheumatic heart disease, cancer, chronic degenerative disease 
and cerebrovascular accidents.  
L.Outline the influence of nutritional factors such as protein energy malnutrition, anemia, 
vitamin deficiency and minerals on disability.  
M.List the principles of health education, methods of communication and role ofA.
 Outline the natural history of diseases and the influence of social, economic and 
cultural aspects of health and diseases.  
B.Outline the various measures of prevention and methods of intervention especially for 
diseases with disability.  
C.Outline the national care delivery system and the public health administration system at 
central and state level.  
D.Outline selected national health programmes.  
E.Define occupational health and list methods of prevention of occupational diseases and 
hazards.  
F.Outline the employees state insurance scheme and its benefits. 
G.Describe the social security measures for protection from occupational hazards, accidents, 
diseases, and the workman’s compensation Act. 
H.Outline the objectives and strategies of the National Family Welfare Programme. 
I.Define community based and institution-based rehabilitation. Describe the advantages and 
disadvantages of institution and community-based rehabilitation.  
J.Describe the following communicable diseases with reference to reservoir, mode of 
transmission, route of entry and levels of prevention: a) Poliomyelitis b) Meningitis c) 
Encephalitis d) Tuberculosis, e) Filariasis, f) Leprosy g) Tetanus &  h)Measles. 
K.Describe the epidemiology of rheumatic heart disease, cancer, chronic degenerative disease 
and cerebrovascular accidents.  
L.Outline the influence of nutritional factors such as protein energy malnutrition, anemia, 
vitamin deficiency and minerals on disability.  
M.List the principles of health education, methods of communication and role of health 
education in rehabilitation services. 
N.Define the role of community leaders and health professionals in health education.  
O.Outline the role of international health agencies in rehabilitation of the disabled.  
P.Hospital waste management: Sources of hospital waste, health hazards, waste management.  
Q.Disaster Management : Natural and man made disasters, disaster impact and response, 
relief phase, epidemiologic surveillance and disease control, nutrition, rehabilitation, disaster 
preparedness.  
 
R.Mental Health: Characteristics of a mentally healthy person, types of mental illness, causes 
of mental ill health, prevention, mental health services, alcohol and drug dependence. 
emphasis on community aspects of mental health. Role of physiotherapist in mental health 
problems such as mental retardation 
UNIT-II                                                                                         I5 hours 
•Intoduction to Community Medicine: 
History of medicine - evolution of community medicine - medicine in the olden days — 
different systems of medicine in different parts of world — origin of modern medicine — 
sanitary awakening — discovery of bacteria, viruses — origin of public health, social & 
preventive medicine & community medicine — health for all — millennium development 
goals. 
•Basic Concepts of Health &Disease :Definitions — dimensions — determinants - indicators - measurement of health — concepts of well being — standards & levels of living — natural 
history of diseases — concepts of control & prevention - modes of interventions- health 
policy & goals. 
•Application of Social and Behavioural Sciences in Community Medicine: 
Humanities in community medicine — medical sociology — social factors in health & 
disease — families — types of families — role of family in health & disease - acculturation 
— social health problems - social organizations - organizational behaviour - leadership — 
delegation — motivation — emotions — group dynamics — group discussions — behaviour 
change communication — skills of communication — counselling in health & disease 
—health economics. 
UNIT-III                                                                                             6hours 
Demography & Family Welfare Planning:  
Definition — demographic cycle —population explosion - population trends in india and 
world — census india 2011 — family welfare planning — contraceptives - national family 
welfare programme — national population policy — gender issues and women’s health. 
•Applied Nutrition:  
Nutrients and their requirements — malnutrition among infants &under fives — growth 
monitoring and nutritional surveillance — nutritional anaemia — vitamin A deficiency — 
iodine deficiency disorders — food consumption surveys — other nutritional health 
problems- national 
nutrition policy — nutrition intervention programmes — prevention of food adulteration - 
food fortification — food toxins. 
 
UNIT- IV                                                                                              10 hours 
Environmental Health:  
Concepts of basic sanitation - potable water — water purification standards 
endemic fluorosis — disposal of solid and liquid wastes - pollution of air, water, soil etc, - 
global warming. 
•General Epidemiology & its applications:  
Concepts in epidemiology — epidemiology of communicable and non- communicable 
•Environmental Health:  
Concepts of basic sanitation - potable water — water purification standards 
—endemic fluorosis — disposal of solid and liquid wastes - pollution of air, water, soil etc, - 
global warming. 
•General Epidemiology & its applications:  
Concepts in epidemiology — epidemiology of communicable and non- communicable 
diseases — methods of epidemiology — causation & association — epidemiological 
surveillance of diseases - outbreak investigation. 
•Epidemiology of Communicable Diseases:  
Vaccine preventable diseases: measles, pertussis, diphtheria, tuberculosis, tetanus, hepatitis 
B, poliomyelitis — water-borne diseases: cholera, typhoid, viral hepatites, food poisoning, 
amoebiasis, ancylostomiasis — vector-borne diseases: malaria, filariasis, dengue, Japanese 
encephalitis, KFD, chikungunya fever, plague — acute respiratory infections — HIV/AIDS 
— STDs — tuberculosis — leprosy — SARS- influenza — swine flu — avian flu — 
zoonotic diseases — rabies — ARBO viral diseases — rickettsial diseases, etc. 
•Epidemiology  of  Non-Communicable  diseases: Diabestes — obesity — hypertension — 
cardiovascular diseases — accidents 
— blindness — cancers. 
UNIT-V                                                                                               9hours 
Maternal & Child Health:  
Preventive obstetrics &pediatrics — antenatal care — intra natal care - post natal care — 
neo-natal care — post neo-natal care — feeding of children• Maternal & Child Health:
  
Preventive obstetrics &pediatrics — antenatal care — intra natal care - post natal care — 
neo-natal care — post neo-natal care — feeding of children 
— breast feeding —supplementary feeding — weaning of children - growth monitoring 
— prevention of child health problems — low birth weight - delivery of MCH services — 
under fives clinics — MCH clinics - indicators of MCH care — neo-natal mortality — post
neo-natal mortality - perinatal mortality - infant mortality — under five mortality — maternal 
mortality — juvenile delinquency — congenital malformations. 
•National  HealthProgrammes:  
Revised National TB Control Programme — leprosy eradication programme — anti malaria 
programme — national filariasis control programme — national vector-borne diseases 
control programme - reproductive & child health programme — MCH services — integrated 
child development programme — immunization programme - school health programme — 
integrated management of neo-natal & childhood illnesses programme — national AIDS 
control programme — national rural & urban health mission — national mental health 
programme — national cancer control programme — national programme for prevention of 
diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and stroke, - national programme for control of 
occupational diseases — integrated diseases surveillance project — national water supply and 
sanitation programme — minimum needs programme — 20 point programme. 
•Occupational Health:  
Introduction — occupational hazards — occupational diseases — pneumoconioses — lead 
poisoning — occupational cancers — radiation hazards — accidents in industries — sickness 
absenteeism — health problems due to industrialization — health protection of industrial 
workers — prevention & control of occupational diseases — legislations: factories act — 
mines act - ESI act. 
•Health Management and Administration:  
Concepts of health care, medical care, health planning — planning cycle — management 
methods & techniques - reports of important health & development committees: Bhore, 
Mudaliar, Jungalwala, Kartar Singh, Srivastava & others — health care delivery in India — 
primary health centers, sub centers, community health centers, etc. 
•Miscellaneous:  
Rehabilitation — community —based rehabilitation - hospital wastes management - disaster 
management — geriatric health problems — medical entomology — vector control - medical 
genetics — research methodology — medical ethics — international Health Regulations — 
ICD - NGOs — WHO — UNCF — ILO — FAO — WB —CARE — DFID - SIDA , etc. 
Course outcomes: 
1.The student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of the influence of social and 
environmental factors on the health of the individual and society. 
2.Learn about the preventable and non preventable diseases  
3.Education about industrial hazards and communicable disease 
4.Measures to take during pandemic disease state. 
5.Knowledge about community based rehabilitation 
Text books: 
1.Prevention & Social Medicine - Park & Park. 
2.Review in community medicine - Seshubabu. 
Reference books: 
1.Hand Book of Preventive and Social Medicine - Vidya Ratan. 
2.Essential of community medicine - A Practical Approach. - D A Hiremath. 
3.Text Book of community Medicine and community Rehabilitation - Dr. T. Bhaskara Rao. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT4501                                Biostatistics & Research methodology                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                                        3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
This course provides postgraduate students with recall of concepts of research methods and 
Biostatistics to enable them to perform advanced research project in the field of 
Physiotherapy. It involves selection of appropriate statistical techniques to address questions 
of healthcare relevance. It explores current and anticipated developments in medical statistics 
as applied to physiotherapists. It is designed to teach postgraduate physiotherapy to develop 
and perform self, Trans and multidisciplinary research methods. 
Course Objectives: 
1: Recall basic concepts of Research methodology and Biostatistics relevant to 
Physiotherapists 
2: Integrate the concepts of Research methods and Biostatistics in planning and conducting 
professional and inter-professional research 
3: Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the concept of variables, measures of central 
tendency, measures of dispersion and concepts of descriptive and inferential statistics 
4: Demonstrate the use of basic research methods in analyzing health care problems and 
biomedical data 
5: Perform statistical analysis of collected data using statistical tools & software and 
recommend solutions 
UNIT-I                                                                                                7 hours 
1.Introduction to research methodology: meaning of research ,objectives of research 
,motivation in research, Types of researches & research approaches, criteria for good research 
,problems encountered by researchers in India 
2.Research problem: statement of research problem, statement of purpose and objectives of 
research problem, necessity of defining problem 
3.Research design: Meaning of research design, Need for research design, features of good 
research design 
UNIT-II                                                                                           12 hours 
1.Sampling design: criteria for selecting procedure , Implications for sampling design , 
stepsin sampling design , different types of sampling designs  
2.Measurement & scaling techniques: measurement in research, scales in research sources of 
error in measurement , technique of developing measurement tools, meaning of scaling & its 
classification important scaling techniques 
3.Methods of data collection : collection of primary data ,  collection  of  data through 
questionnaires & schedules , Differences between questionnaires & schedules 
4.Sampling fundamentals : need for sampling & some fundamental definitions , important 
sampling distributions 
UNIT-III    8 hours 
1.Processing & analysis of data: processing operations, problems in processing, types of 
analysis, statistics in research, Measures of central tendency, Dispersion, Asymmetry 
relationship 
2.Testing of Hypothesis:  what is Hypothesis, basic concepts concerning testing of 
hypothesis, limitations of testing of hypothesis 
3.Computer technology: Introduction to computers, computer application in research, 
computers & researcher 
UNIT-IV                                                                                            10 hours 
1.Introduction to BIOSTATISTICS: : Meaning , definition , characteristics of  statistics  ,  
importance  of study  of  statistics  ,Branches  of  statistics  ,  statistics  and  health  science 
including physiotherapy , parameters and estimates , descriptive and inferential statistics 
variables and their types , measurement scales 
2.Tabulation of Data : Basic principles of graphical representations , types of diagrams — 
histograms , frequency polygons , smooth frequency polygon , cumulative frequency curve , 
non probability curve 
UNIT-V                                                                                              8 hours 
1.Measure of central tendency: Need for measure of central tendency, definition and 
calculation of mean -ungrouped & grouped, Meaning of calculation ofMode, comparison of 
mean, median and mode 
2.Probability and standard deviation: Meaning of probability of standard distribution, THE 
BINOMIAL DISTRIBUTION, the normal distribution, divergence from normality — 
skewness, kurtosis 
Course Outcomes: 
1.Recall basic concepts of Research methodology and Biostatistics relevant to 
Physiotherapists 
2: Integrate the concepts of Research methods and Biostatistics in planning and conducting 
professional and inter-professional research 
3: Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the concept of variables, measures of central 
tendency, measures of dispersion and concepts of descriptive and inferential statistics 
4: Demonstrate the use of basic research methods in analyzing health care problems and 
biomedical data 
5: Perform statistical analysis of collected data using statistical tools & software and 
recommend solutions 
Text books: 
1.Carolin Hicks Research for Physiotherapy. 
2.Text book of Biostatistics by SundarRao. 
3.Text book of Biostatistics and Research methodology by U.Satyanarayana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Cardio Respiratory conditions for physiotherapists 
BPTT4502                                                                                                                L T P C 
                                                                                                                                   3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces the student to the cardio - thoracic conditions which commonly cause 
disability. Particular effort is to be made to avoid burdening the student with any detail 
pertaining to diagnosis which will not contribute to their understanding of the limitations 
imposed by cardio - thoracic pathology on the functioning of the individual. 
Course Objectives: 
1:The student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of cardio - thoracic conditions 
causing disability and their management. 
2.To analyze the patient with artificial airway and provide physiotherapy management 
procedures in intensive care unit (ICU). 
3.To demonstrate appropriate airway clearance techniques in different patient population and 
manual facilitation techniques for the respiratory muscles in different breathing patterns. 
4.To demonstrate appropriate management to reduce work of breathing and improve lung 
volumes. 
5.To demonstrate the appropriate chest physiotherapy management techniques for various 
post operative pulmonary conditions.  
UNIT-I                                                                                             8hours 
A.ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY:   
1.Describe in detail the anatomy of the thoracic cage. 
2.Describe in detail the anatomy of the lungs, bronchi and bronchopulmonary segments. 
3.Relationship of the bony thorax and the lungs to each other and to the abdominal contents. 
4.Briefly describe the variations in the bony cage in the following conditions: 
a.Cervical ribs: thoracic outlet syndrome 
b.Rickets - rickety rosary 
c.Depression deformities: pectus excavatum 
d.Protrusion deformities: pectus carinatum (pigeon chest) 
e.Scoliosis 
f.Kyphosis 
g.Rare deformities: sternal clefts, absent sternum, Poland syndrome, fused ribs, absent ribs, 
Jenunes disease. 
5.Describe the movements of the thorax: Bucket handle, pump handle. 
6.List the muscles of respirations involved in inspiration and expiration (including accessory 
muscles of respiration). 
7.List the mechanical factors involved in breathing. Describe briefly factors affecting lung 
compliance and airway resistance 
8.Describe in detail the cough reflex 
UNIT-II                                                                                             8 hours 
1.List the factors affecting diffusion of oxygen and carbon-dioxide in the lungs. Explain 
ventilation, perfusion and their inter relationship. 
2.Describe the physiological control of respiration and highlight the function of the medullary 
and pontine respiratory centres and central and peripheral chemoreceptors. 
3.Pulmonary function assessment: Briefly describe the pulmonary function tests and their 
use; briefly outline the basis and value of blood gas analysis. 
4.Describe in brief the anatomy of the heart and its blood supply and briefly outline the 
electrical activity or the myocardium and normal ECG. 
5.Describe the mechanism for maintenance of blood pressure.Fundamentals of ECG 
recording and basic interpretation. 
6.Briefly describe the principles of Echocardiography: M-mode, Doppler (trans thoracic and 
trans oesophageal echocardiography) 
UNIT-III                                                                                             8 hours 
1.Briefly outline the principles of cardio vascular stress testing. 
2.Basics of arrhythmias, syncope and its management. 
3.Principles, indication and methodology of temporary and permanent pacemarker 
implantation 
4.Fundamentals of cardiac catheterization:  angioplasty, percutaneous balloon mitral 
valvotomy, pulmonary valvotomy, aortic valvotomy, device closure of patent ductus 
arteriosus, atrial septal defects, ventricular septal defects. 
5.Outline the energy expenditure of various common daily activities. 
6.INTENSIVE CARE:  
a.Outline briefly the principles of various ventilators and their use. 
b. Tracheostomy: definition, indications, procedure, complications and advantages. 
c.Describe in detail the following post-operative procedures: management of endotracheal / 
endonasal tube, tracheal suction. 
weaning the patient from the ventilator, extubating technique, post extubation care. 
7.MISCELLANEOUS:   
1.Briefly outline the management of a patient after a myocardial infarction. 
2.Briefly outline the management of a patient with chronic obstructive airway disease. 
8.RECENT ADVANCES:  
1.Transcatheter aortic and mitral valve implantation. 
UNIT-III                                                                                             8 hours 
1.Briefly outline the principles of cardio vascular stress testing. 
2.Basics of arrhythmias, syncope and its management. 
3.Principles, indication and methodology of temporary and permanent pacemarker 
implantation 
4.Fundamentals of cardiac catheterization:  angioplasty, percutaneous balloon mitral 
valvotomy, pulmonary valvotomy, aortic valvotomy, device closure of patent ductus 
arteriosus, atrial septal defects, ventricular septal defects. 
5.Outline the energy expenditure of various common daily activities. 
6.INTENSIVE CARE:  
a.Outline briefly the principles of various ventilators and their use. 
b. Tracheostomy: definition, indications, procedure, complications and advantages. 
c.Describe in detail the following post-operative procedures: management of endotracheal / 
endonasal tube, tracheal suction. 
weaning the patient from the ventilator, extubating technique, post extubation care. 
7.MISCELLANEOUS:   
1.Briefly outline the management of a patient after a myocardial infarction. 
2.Briefly outline the management of a patient with chronic obstructive airway disease. 
8.RECENT ADVANCES:  
1.Transcatheter aortic and mitral valve implantation. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                            12 hours 
CARDIAC SURGERY:  
1.Introduction to cardiac surgery: define extra cardiac operations, closed intra-cardiac 
operations and open cardiac operations. 
2.Principles of cardiopulmonary bypass and its complications. Define hypothermia and deep 
circulatory arrest. 
3.Myocardial preservation techniques during cardiopulmonary bypass. 
4.Principles of left heart bypass (left aorta femoral bypass), femoral bypass, Gotts shunt, 
minimally access surgery, port access surgery 
5.Cardiac conditions requiring closed heart surgery: 
a.Congenital diseases: Patent ductus arteriosus, coarctation of aorta. 
b.Acquired heart diseases: mitral stenosis 
6.Cardiac conditions requiring open heart surgery: briefly describe the pathophysiology, 
clinical presentations and management of the following conditions: 
a.Congenital diseases: atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defects, pulmonary stenosis, 
tetralogy of Fallot, double outlet right ventricle. transposition of great vessels, AV canal 
defect. 
b.Acquired diseases: mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation, aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation, 
and mixed valvular lesions. 
Coronary artery disease: clinical presentation, pathophysiology and management: PTCA and 
stenting, off pump coronary artery bypasssurgery (OPCAB), on pump coronary artery bypass 
grafting, minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass (MIDCAB). 
7.Intra-aortic balloon pump: principles, indications, advantages and disadvantages 
8.Fundamental principles of ventricular assist devices 
9.Cardiac transplantation 
10.Principles of robotic surgery in cardiac surgery 
UNIT-V                                                                                          10hours 
THORACIC SURGERY:  
1.Pathophysiology of various forms of chest trauma. Cardiac tamponade. 
2.Describe very briefly the clinical features and management of the following: simple and 
multiple rib fractures, flail chest, stove in chest, pneumothorax, hemothorax, 
hemopneumothorax. Lung contusion, laceration, injury to heart, great vessels and injury to 
the tracheo-bronchial tree. 
3.Empyema thoracis: definition, causes, management. Briefly describe intercostals drainage, 
rib resection, decortication and window operation. 
4.Pulmonary Tuberculosis: clinical presentation, pathology, and management. 
List the manifestations of pulmonary tuberculosis and briefly describe tuberculoma, 
bronchiectasis sicca, broncho stenosis.  Clinical presentation of destroyed lung and 
management. Management of hemoptysis. Define massive hemoptysis and the strategies 
involved in the management of patients with massive hemoptysis including bronchial artery 
embolization, cryoablation. 
5.Outline briefly the clinical features and management of the following suppurative lesions of 
the lung; bronchiectasis, lung abscess, bronchopneumonia & aspergillosis. 
6.Outline briefly the clinical features and management of carcinoma lung. 
7.Outline the extent, use and complications of the following surgical incisions: anterolateral 
thoracotomy, posterolateral thoracotomy and median sternotomy. 
8.Describe and define the following and the post-operative management of patients who have 
undergone wedge resection, segmentectomy, lobectomy, bilobeotomy, pneumonectomy, 
pleuropneumonectomy& tracheostomy. 
9.Describe in detail the preoperative assessment and management of a patient posted for 
thoracotomy. 
10.One lung anaesthesia: principle, indications and contraindications. 
11.Video — assisted thoracoscopy surgery: principle, indications, contraindications and
 advantages. 
12.Describe the principles of cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, cardiac massage, artificial 
respiration, defibrillators and their uses. 
13.Advanced life support system 
Course Outcomes: 
1.To analyze the patient with artificial airway and provide physiotherapy management 
procedures in intensive care unit (ICU). 
2.To demonstrate appropriate airway clearance techniques in different patient population and 
manual facilitation techniques for the respiratory muscles in different breathing patterns. 
3.To demonstrate appropriate management to reduce work of breathing and improve lung 
volumes. 
4.To demonstrate the appropriate chest physiotherapy management techniques for various 
post operative pulmonary conditions.  
5.To demonstrate interpersonal and communication skills and approach the patients, relatives, 
and caregivers with empathy. 
Text books: 
1.Cardiac Rehabilitation by Piyush Jain. 
2.Davidsons principles & practice of medicine. 
3.Text book of Heart, Chest & Vascular diseases for Physiotherapist - Patrica A dowine. 
Reference books: 
1.Frownfelter D, Dean E.  Principles and Practice of Cardiopulmonary Physical Therapy – E- 
book: Evidence to practice, 5th Edition.  Elsevier Health Sciences; 2014.ISBN : 
9780323291170. 
2.Irwin S, Tecklin JS. Cardiopulmonary Physical Therapy: A Guide to Practice, 4th Edition. 
USA: Mosby Inc.; 2004. ISBN: 9780323018401. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physiotherapy for Cardio Respiratory conditions 
BPTT4503                                                                                                                    L T P C 
                                                                                                                                       4 0  6 7 
Course Description: 
This course serves to integrate the knowledge gained by the students in clinical 
cardiorespiratory conditions with skills gained in exercise therapy, electrotherapy and 
massage, thus enabling them to apply these in clinical situations of dysfunction due to 
cardiorespiratory pathology. 
Course Objectives: 
1:The student will be able to identify cardiorespiratory dysfunction, set treatment goals and 
apply their skills in exercise therapy, electrotherapy and massage in clinical situations to 
restore cardiorespiratory function 
2.To analyze the patient with artificial airway and provide physiotherapy management 
procedures in intensive care unit (ICU). 
3.To demonstrate appropriate airway clearance techniques in different patient population and 
manual facilitation techniques for the respiratory muscles in different breathing patterns. 
4.To demonstrate appropriate management to reduce work of breathing and improve lung 
volumes. 
5.To demonstrate the appropriate chest physiotherapy management techniques for various 
post operative pulmonary conditions.  
UNIT-I                                                                                            12 hours 
A.ANATOMY:  
1.Cardio vascular system: 
•Mediastinum: divisions and contents 
 •Pericardium: thoracic wall: position, shape and parts of the heart, conducting system, blood 
supply and nerve supply of the heart, names of the blood vessels and their distribution in the 
body, region wise. 
2.Respiratory system: 
•Outline of the respiratory passages. 
•Pleura and lungs: position, parts, relations, blood supply and nerve supply. 
•Lungs — emphasis on bronchopulmonary segments and their applied aspects. 
•Diaphragm: origin, insertion, nerve supply and action 
•Intercostal muscles and accessory muscles of respiration: origin, insertion, nerve supply and 
action. 
3.Thorax 
•List the main bones and joints of thoracic cage. Mention the boundaries and contents of 
thoracic cavity. 
•Analyse pump handle and bucket handle movement of ribs. 
•Surface anatomy of heart and lungs. 
B.PHYSIOLOGY:  
1.Cardiovascular system: 
•Properties of cardiac muscle, cardiac cycle. 
•ECG, heart sounds, cardiac output. 
•Factors regulating the action of the heart. 
•Blood pressure, its maintenance and regulation. 
•Renal circulation, pulmonary circulation 
•Vascular mechanics 
•Lymph factors affecting its flow. 
2.Respiratory system: 
•Defence mechanism in the respiratory tract, mucociliary transport, mechanics of respiration. 
•Transport of blood gases, acid base balance. 
•Neural and chemical regulation of respiration. 
C.GENERAL OVERVIEW:   ASSESSMENT  
— Describe physical assessment in cardio respiratory dysfunction. 
1.Inspection: 
posture (recumbent, erect orthopneic): breathing pattern (rate, rhythm and pattern, use of 
accessory muscles), chest movement (symmetry, intercostals and diaphragmatic 
components), chest deformity (barrel chest, pigeon chest); spinal deformity (scoliosis, 
kyphosis, kyphoscoliosis); sputum (colour, type, volume, consistency); cough (types, 
productive / non-productive, presence of a normal cough reflex). 
2.Palpation: 
Tactile and vocal fremitus, mobility of cervical and thoracic spine, shoulder girdle, rib cage. 
3.Percussion: dullness and hyperresonance. 
4.Auscultation: Normal and abnormal breath sounds. 
5.Measurement: Chest expansion at different levels (axiliary, nipple, xiphoid); exercise 
tolerance (six minute walking test). 
6.Cardiac dysfunction: evaluation of risk factors, respiratory system evaluation, heart rate 
rhythm. 
7.Physical assessment in post-operative lung and cardiac conditions: surgery details, date, 
duration, events, types and extent, incision, vitals, drains, pain, ROM, thoracic cavity, neck, 
shoulder girdle, thoracic spine, chest excursion, air entry, sputum, posture, neurological 
complications, exercise tolerance. 
UNIT-II                                                                                           15 hours 
A. GENERAL OVERVIEW: PHYSICAL TREATMENT:  
1.Describe indications, goals and procedure of breathing exercise. Describe diaphragmatic 
breathing, localized basal expansion, apical expansion, specific segmental exercise raising the 
resting respiratory level. 
2.Describe chest mobilization exercises. 
3.Describe relaxation positions for the breathless patient: high side, lying, sitting, relaxed 
sitting, forward lean, standing, relaxed standing. 
4.Describe controlled breathing during walking and during functional activity. 
5.Describe exercise for the breathless patient: exercise tolerance testing and exercise 
programme. 
6.Describe the technique of huffing and coughing, forced expiratory technique, vibratory 
chest shaking and percussion, autogenic drainage, active cycle of breathing, inspiratory 
muscle training and flutter. 
7.Describe techniques of postural drainage, including indications, general precautions and 
contra indications, preparation of drainage of individual bronchopulmonary segments, 
modified postural drainage and continuing postural drainage as a home programme. 
8.Outline the history of mechanical respiration. Define the following terms a) respirator b) 
lung ventilator c) resuscitators d) body ventilator e) electrosimulator f) IPPB g) PEEP h) 
CPAP i) SIMV j) NEEP. Classify ventilators by their cycling control (volume cycling, 
pressure cycling, time cycling and mixed cycling). Describe the principles of operation of 
commonly used ventilators and outline the use of the following types: I) bear II) Bennett 
III) Emerson IV) Bird. 
Outline the principles of aerosol therapy. Describe the physical properties of aerosols and 
their deposition in the alveoli. Describe the principles of operation of nebulisers. 
9.Outline the principles of humidification therapy and methods of correcting humidity 
deficits. Describe the principles of operation of pass — over humidifiers and bubble — 
diffusion aerosol therapy. Describe the physical properties of aerosols and their deposition in 
the alveoli. Describe the principles of operation of nebulizers. 
10.Outline the principles of humidification therapy and methods of correcting humidity 
deficits. Describe the principles of operation of pass — over humidifiers and bubble — 
diffusion humidifiers. 
11.Describe techniques of sterile nasopharyngeal and endotracheal suctioning. 
B. PHYSIOTHERAPY IN OBSTRUCTIVE LUNG DISEASES:  
1.Assess: Effort of breathing, extent of wheeze, pattern of breathing, sputum production, 
chest deformity, exercise tolerance (patients effort tolerance). 
2.Identify problems: Decreased outflow due to bronchospasm, anxiety due to difficulty in 
ventilation, exhaustion due to increased work of disturbed breathing. Increased secretions 
which are difficult to remove, decreased exercise tolerance. 
3.Demonstrate treatment techniques: Relaxation postures and techniques, reassurance and 
education about disease, controlled breathing, breathing exercise, postural drainage, vibratory 
shaking, huffing and coughing, graduated exercise programme and posture correction. 
UNIT-III                                                                                          14 hours 
A. PHYSIOTHERAPY IN CHEST INFECTIONS:  
1.Assess: Sputum, cough, fever and dysponea. 
2.Identify problems: Productive cough with risk of hemoptysis, exhaustion due to increased 
work of breathing, chest deformity, decreased exercise tolerance. 
3.Demonstrate treatment techniques: Postural drainage with use of adjuncts, percussion, 
vibration, huffing and coughing to expectorate, mobilizing exercises to thorax and graduated 
exercise. 
B. PHYSIOTHERAPY IN RESTRICTIVE LUNG DISORDERS:  
1.Assess: Chest expansion at different levels, mobility of thorax and spine, posture (kyphosis 
or scoliosis) and tests for exercise tolerance (six minute walking test). 
2.Identify problems: Decreased expansion of lung due to restriction of chest wall movement 
causing decreased ventilation, defective posture and decreased exercise tolerance. 
3.Demonstrate treatment techniques: Vigorous mobilizing exercises to thorax and spine, 
breathing exercise to increase ventilation and drain secretions, exercises for posture 
correction, graduated exercises to increase tolerance. 
C.PRINCIPLES OF INTENSIVE CARE PHYSIOTHERAPY:  
Describe the principles of intensive care therapy. 
1.Demonstrate knowledge of the following equipment: endotracheal tubes, tracheostomy 
tubes, humidifier, ventilators, high frequency ventilators, differential ventilators, CPAP 
masks, Suction pump, electrocardiogram, pressure monitors — arterial, central venous, 
pulmonary artery and pulmonary wedge: intracranial and temperature monitors. 
2.Assess : Special instructions pertaining to any operation performed, respiration, level of 
consciousness, colour, blood pressure, pulse, temperature, sputum expectorated (colour and  
quantity),  drugs  (time  of last dose of analgesic given), drains, presence of pacemaker or 
intraaortic balloon pump. ECG and blood gas results. Describe chest radiograph with respect 
to expansion of lungs, size of heart, presence of secretions and placement of chest tubes. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                         13 hours 
A. PHYSIOTHERAPY AFTER PULMONARY SURGERY:  
Pre operative: 
1.Assess: special instructions pertaining to operative procedure performed, breath sounds, 
cyanosis, respiratory rate, temperature and pulse, blood pressure, drainage from pleural drain 
(bubbling or winging), sputum expectorated, analgesia, movements of chest wall (symmetry) 
position of patient and effort of breathing, chest radiograph and blood gases. 
2.Identify problems: Pain due to intercostal drain in situ, decreased air entry, retained 
secretions, decreased movements of the shoulder of affected side, decreased mobility and 
poor posture. 
3.Demonstrate treatment techniques: deep breathing and segmental breathing exercises, 
vibrations, percussions, huffing and coughing, full range active assisted arm exercises, ankle 
foot exercises, trunk exercises, posture correction, positioning of patient, IPPB inhalations. 
B. PHYSIOTHERAPY AFTER CARDIAC SURGERY:  
Pre operative: 
1.Assess patients’ medical history, normal breathing pattern of patient, pulse, respiratory rate, 
BP. Thoracic mobility, posture and patients exercise tolerance. 
2.Identify problems: Excess secretions, decreased mobility of thorax, defective posture, 
decreased exercise tolerance. Demonstrate treatment techniques: Explain to the patients about 
their operation and about the incision. ICU. Endotracheal tube, central lines, nasogastric tube, 
catheter, ECG, leads, drains, peripherallines, temperature probe etc.  Teach breathing 
exercises, slanting of incision, huffing and coughing, correct posture, range of motion, 
exercises totrunk andshoulder, active exercises to ankle and foot. Post operative: Assess 
special instructions pertaining to operative procedure performed, type of incision, blood 
pressure, pulse rate, respiration, colour, time of last analgesic dose, drains, temperature, ECG. 
chest x-ray and blood gases. 
Post operative:1.Identify problems: Pain, decreased air entry, retained secretions, reduced 
arm and leg movements. Decreased mobility. 
2.Demonstrate treatment techniques: Deep breathing exercises, suctioning, active / assisted 
exercises to arm and leg, graduated exercise programme. 
C.PHYSIOTHERAPY IN GENERAL SURGERY:  
1.Assess the patients medical history, past treatment, breathing pattern, ability to cough and 
pain. 
2.Identify problems: Pain, increased secretions. Defective posture and correction and 
graduated exercise programme. 
3.Demonstrate treatment techniques: Breathing exercise, huffing and coughing, mobilizing 
exercise, posture correction and graduated exercise programme. 
UNIT-V6 hours 
A. PHYSIOTHERAPY IN REHABILITATION AFTER MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION: 
1.Describe the role of the physiotherapist in a coronary care unit during the first 48 hours. 
2.Describe the principles of formulation of an exercise programme, bed exercises, walking, 
stair climbing. 
3.Describe a home exercise programme and advise leisure activities. 
4.Describe physiotherapy for complications after myocardial infarction: chest infection, 
cerebral embolism and shoulder hand syndrome. 
B. PERIPHERAL VASCULAR DISEASES:  
1.Outline the pathology, distribution and symptoms of atherosclerosis, intermittent 
claudication, Burgers disease, Raynaud’s disease and arterial embolus. 
2.Assessment of the above conditions. 
3.Management of the above conditions. 
Course Outcomes: 
1.To analyze the patient with artificial airway and provide physiotherapy management 
procedures in intensive care unit (ICU). 
2.To demonstrate appropriate airway clearance techniques in different patient population and 
manual facilitation techniques for the respiratory muscles in different breathing patterns. 
3.To demonstrate appropriate management to reduce work of breathing and improve lung 
volumes. 
4.To demonstrate the appropriate chest physiotherapy management techniques for various 
post operative pulmonary conditions.  
5.To demonstrate interpersonal and communication skills and approach the patients, relatives, 
and caregivers with empathy. 
Text books:  
 
1.Cash Text for Chest, Heart & Vascular disorders. 
 
2.The Brompton guide to chest physiotherapy by D.U.Gasket. 
 
3.Text book of Cardiopulmonary rehabilitation - Scott Irwin. 
 
4.Cardiopulmonary Physical therapy — Dona frownfelter 
 
5.Clinical Physical therapy — Webber & Prayer. 
Reference books: 
1.Frownfelter D, Dean E.  Principles and Practice of Cardiopulmonary Physical Therapy – E- 
book: Evidence to practice, 5th Edition.  Elsevier Health Sciences; 2014.ISBN : 
9780323291170. 
2.Irwin S, Tecklin JS. Cardiopulmonary Physical Therapy: A Guide to Practice, 4th Edition. 
USA: Mosby Inc.; 2004. ISBN: 9780323018401. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAMME ELECTIVE-I (Hand rehabilitation) 
BPTT4601 a                                                                                                L T P C 
  3 0 0 3 
COURSE DESCRIPTIOIN: 
This course imparts clinical knowledge about physiotherapy practice in general and 
hand surgical conditions for various ailments with hands on training to apply various 
treatment techniques to hand injured patients 
COURSE OBJECTIVES: 
1: Assess and treat soft tissue conditions of hand 
2: Evaluate and treat tendon injuries of hand 
3: Evaluate and treat fracture and mutilating injuries of hand 
4: Evaluate and treat Nerve injuries of hand 
5: Apply principles to fabricate hand splints 
UNIT-I                                                                                                 5hours 
Hand 
I. Evaluation of Hand 
General clinical and physiotherapy evaluation of hand edema- Various methods of evaluation 
and its management. 
Sensibility assessment. 
UNIT-II                                                                                            12 hours 
Soft tissue conditions of hand 
Claw hand, Trigger finger, deQuervain’s Disease, Dupuytren’s disease. 
Tendon injuries 
1) Flexor tendon injuries – post operative physiotherapy management 
2) Extensor tendon injuries - post operative physiotherapy management 
3) Tendon transfer – indications, selection of tendons for transfer, tendon excursion,. post 
operative physiotherapy management 
4) Tenolysis- post operative physiotherapy management 
UNIT-III                                                                                            12 hours 
Mutilating injuries of hand 
1)Reid’s classification 
2)Physiotherapy management of mutilated hand 
3)Prescription of hand prosthesis. 
Post operative Physiotherapy management of Nerve injuries 
1.Radial nerve injury 
2.Ulnar nerve injury 
3.Median nerve injury 
4.Neurolysis 
UNIT-IV                                                                                           10 hours 
Fractures of hand 
Physiotherapy management of 
Fracture of carpal bones 
Fractures of metacarpal bones 
Fractures of bones of phalanx 
Fabrication of  hand splints 
Indications, armamentarium required for hand splints, 
UNIT-V                                                                                               6 hours 
Plastic surgery in hand 
Burns – Types,clinical anatomy, clinical and therapeutic management and complications of 
Burns in hand 
Skin Grafts – Indications, types, limitations, pre and post operative physiotherapeutic 
management of same 
Course Outcomes: 
1: Assess and treat soft tissue conditions of hand 
2: Evaluate and treat tendon injuries of hand 
3: Evaluate and treat fracture and mutilating injuries of hand 
4: Evaluate and treat Nerve injuries of hand 
5: Apply principles to fabricate hand splints 
Text  books: 
1.Rehabilitation of the hand. Surgery and therapy- Scheider James M Hunter.MD-3rd edition 
Mosby 
2.Occupational Hand and Upper extremities injuries and disease- Mortan L-Kasdam. Mosby. 
Hanley &Belfi 
3.Hand rehabilitation- A quick reference guide and review- Nancy Falkenstein.Mosby 
4.Physical rehabilitation- assessment and treatment- Susan B. O.Sullaivan-4th edition Jaypee 
5.Thomas J Schmitz 
6.Cash’s Text book of general Medical &,surgical condition for physiotherapists- Patricia A. 
Downie 
7.Examination of the hand and wrist- Raoul Tubiana. Mosby 
Reference books: 
1.Hand secrets- Peter J L Jebson and Mortan.LKasvan 
2.Hand therapy- Principles and practice- Maureen Salter 
Hand rehabilitation- Gaylord L.Clark, EF Shaw Wilgis-2nd edition Mosby 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           PROGRAMME ELECTIVE -I (Entrepreneurship for physiotherapist) 
BPTT4601b                                                                                                                L T P C 
                                                                                                                                    3 0 0 3 
Course Description: 
This course describes about the skill development in clinical set up and management 
 
COURSE OBJECTIVE:  
1. Setup own clinical setup and develop communication skills  
2. Able to manage finances in the clinical setting. 
3.Learns about the models of health care improvements. 
4. Knowledge about legal and ethical considerations. 
5.Gain knowledge in managing and supervising Communicating with skill Strategic planning, 
structural framework 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                            2 hours 
Introduction to entrepreneurial physical therapist.: Motivations for private practice. Essential 
entrepreneur characteristics and knowing the entrepreneur talents. Opportunities and threats 
associated with private practice. Case studies of successful physiotherapy entrepreneurs 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                         10 hours 
Theories and Regulations: Theories and models of health care improvements. Theories and 
models of innovation and entrepreneurship for idea development and idea feasibility analysis. 
Patient safety regulations and ethics regulation. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                       10 hours 
Guiding behaviour and legal and ethical considerations: Values and ethical principles: 
personal values, philosophical statement, mission statement, vision statement, professional 
ethics, selected behaviour related documents of the Indian physiotherapy association (IAP). 
Clinical establishment act standard for physiotherapy centre in India. Legal framework in 
India in business environment Health care system and regulatory rules and reforms in India. 
Role of documentation Liability with various practice settings Legal issues, private 
malpractice insurance. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                       15 hours 
Business acumen Leading, managing and supervising Communicating with skill Strategic 
planning, structural framework, importance of networking Organizing for business success 
Management and decision-making Marketing basics Employment and labour law in India 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                          8 hours 
Financial awareness, Management and funding: Economic principles accounting and 
financing making structured personal financial decision, inter professional collaboration and 
teamwork, change management, Diversity, Exploring funding options such as loans, grants, 
and investment 
COURSE OUTCOMES: 
1.Analysis of opportunities and rule out the ability to become an entrepreneur. 
2.Build up communication and management skills required to become and acquired 
knowledge regarding theories and safety regulations. 
3.Explain the rules and regulations to be adopted as per IAP 
4.Practice professional behaviour required for being an entrepreneur. 
5.Inculcate basic financial awareness skills in order to manage finances. 
Text Books : 
 1. Managerial and supervisory principles for physical therapists. 3rd edition. Larry J nosse. 
 2. The physical therapist’s business practice and legal guide. Sheila k. Nicholson.  
3.” Physiotherapy Entrepreneurship: Building your practice from the ground up” 
4. “The Physiotherapist’s Playbook: Strategies for successful 
5.”Healthy Business, Healthy Patients: Entrepreneurial Principles for Physiotherapists” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIII SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BPTT4506                            REHABILITATION MEDICINE                                L T P C 
                                                                                                                                        4 0 98.5 
COURSE DESCRIPTION: 
Following the basic sciences and clinical sciences course, this course will enable the students 
to understand their role in the management of disability. 
COURSE OBJECTIVES: 
1: The concept of team approach in rehabilitation (practical demonstration, with contributions 
from all members of the team). 
2: Diagnostic features in physical conditions (practised through clinical demonstration). 
3: Medical and surgical aspects of disabling conditions (explained in relation to 
rehabilitation). 
4: Residual potentials in patients with partial or total disability (temporary or permanent) 
5: Appropriate goals (long and short term) in treatment & rehabilitation 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                          12 hours  
A. INTRODUCTION:  -Define the term rehabilitation.  Explain its aims and principles. -Discuss team work involved in rehabilitation. Explain briefly the role of each team member. 
B. COMMUNITY BASED REHABILITATION MODULE:  
Describe a CBR module and compare this with an institution-based rehabilitation system. 
B. THERAPEUTIC TECHNIQUES:  
Explain the theory and mechanism of therapeutic techniques and relevant precautions, for the 
following: - 
1.Joint mobilization and manipulation 
2.Reducing spasm. 
3.Assisting weak muscles. 
4.Increasing endurance 
5.Muscle re-education following muscle transfer surgery. 
6.Strengthening muscles. 
7.Increasing co-ordination. 
8.Improving balance. 
9.Gait training with various assistive aids 
UNIT-II                                                                                             12 hours 
A. COMMUNICATION PROBLEMS:  
Identify communication problems, classify these and outline principles of treatment and 
training 
B. BEHAVIOURAL PROBLEMS:  
Identify behavioural problems in the disabled and outline principles of management. 
C.PAIN:  
Describe the theories of pain and discuss therapeutic management of pain using various 
modalities. 
UNIT-III                                                                                          16hours 
A. EVALUATION OF PHYSICAL DYSFUNCTION:  
Demonstrate methods of evaluation for physical dysfunction & management of disabilities 
with particular reference to: Spinal cord injury (paraplegia and tetraplegia), poliomyelitis, 
brain injury, (including stroke and cerebral palsy) arthritic conditions, muscular dystrophy, 
Hansens disease, peripheral nerve lesions. Fracture disease & chronic cardio — respiratory 
dysfunction. 
B. DISABILITY EVALUATION:  
 Outline the principles of disability evaluation and discuss its use. 
C.ORTHOTIC DEVICES:  
Explain the principles involved in prescribing orthotic devices and fabrication for different 
parts of the body. Outline the purpose of each type and list major indications & contra 
indications and demonstrate methods of training in their use. 
D.PROSTHETIC DEVICES:  
Describe types of artificial limb and their functions. Demonstrate methods of pre and post 
training and their use. 
I.MOBILITY AIDS:  
Demonstrate knowledge of the indications for different types of mobility aids, and their 
functions eg. wheelchairs, walkers, crutches. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                              8 hours 
A. GERIATRIC REHABILITATION:  
•Life history 
•Sociological & technological aspects 
•The ageing body 
•Theories of ageing:physiological : environmental 
•Locomotor system 
•Cardio-respiratory system 
•Neurological function 
•Autonomic function 
•Metabolic function 
•Approach to the treatment 
•Interview 
•Examination 
•Aims of intervention 
•Role of the Physiotherapist 
B. PALLIATIVE CARE:  
1.Define the term palliative care 
2.Role of team members in palliative care 
3.Explain briefly the role of each team member 
4.Palliative care in terminal illness 
UNIT-V                                                                                          12 hours 
A.LEGAL ASPECTS:  
Outline legal aspects of disability, terms of compensation for disability and benefits available 
to the disabled. 
B. SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS:  
Outline the social implications of disability for the individual and for the community. 
C.PRE-VOCATIONAL EVALUATION:  
Discuss methods and team involvement in pre-vocational evaluation and training. 
D.ARCHITECTURAL BARRIERS:  
Describe architectural barriers and possible modifications, with reference to rheumatoid 
arthritis, cerebrovascular accident, spinal cord injury, and other disabling conditions. 
Parkinsons disease, amputation, muscular dystrophy, cerebral palsy, poliomyelitis, peripheral 
nerve lesions, Hansens disease, multiple sclerosis. 
COURSE OUTCOMES: 
1: The concept of team approach in rehabilitation (practical demonstration, with contributions 
from all members of the team). 
2: Medical and surgical aspects of disabling conditions (explained in relation to 
rehabilitation). 
3: Residual potentials in patients with partial or total disability (temporary or permanent) 
4: Appropriate goals (long and short term) in treatment & rehabilitation 
5: Learns the concepts of community based rehabilitation. 
Text books:  
1.Text book of rehabilitation medicine by Sunder. 
2.Text Book of rehabilitation medicine by Delisa. 
3.Geriatrics Rehabilitation - Tidys physiotherapy 
4.Cash Text Book of General Surgery. 
5.Physical Rehabilitation Assessment and treatment - Susan O Sullivan. 
Reference books: 
1.Physiological basics of Rehabilitation Medicine - Downy and Darlings. 
2.Hand Book of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation - Randall and Broddom. 
3.Manual of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation - Christopher M Brammer. 
4.Joan E. Edelstein - Jan Bruckner - Orthotics A comprehensive clinical approach. 
 
 
 
PROGRAMME ELECTIVE-II (STRENGTH AND CONDITIONING) 
BPTT4602a                                                                                                                  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                      3 0 0 3 
COURSE DISCRIPTION: 
This course means engaging in activity to improve performance and/or fitness; this is best 
accomplished by understanding general seven sports training principles: overload, 
reversibility, progression, individualization, periodization, and specificity. In this course 
students may be able to learn  
Project Based Learning (PBL) 
COURSE OBJECTIVES: 
1: To give knowledge and skills to enter the fitness industry as a skilled strength and 
conditioning expert 
2: To demonstrate professional practice with moral values and ethical principles of training 
3: To provide relevant practice parameters for Strength & Conditioning professionals to 
utilize when carrying out their responsibilities in providing services to athletes or other 
participants. 
4.Gain knowledge on basic physical fitness 
5.Sports specific training 
UNIT-I                                                                                             6hours  
BASICS OF PHYSICAL FITNESS  
•Basic Physical fitness components: Strength, Speed, Endurance, Mobility. 
•Introduction to methods of improving– General exercises, special exercises, competition 
specific exercises  
•Factors determining quality of training 
•Model of training  
•Stages of trainer and Trainee relationship: Rapport Investigation, Planning and Action. 
UNIT-II                                                                                           9 hours 
COMPONENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF SPORTS TRAINING 
•Components of Sports Training: Meaning of the terms Unit, Session, Micro Cycle, Meso 
Cycle and Macro Cycle  
•Physiological basis of Periodization - Periodization models - Types of Periodization  
•Periodization of strength training, speed training, endurance training  
•Principles of Sports training: Principle of variation of training - Principle of specificity - 
Principle of individualization - Principle of over load - Principle of diminishing return  
•Force-velocity - Relationship Scientific and systematic planning 
UNIT-III                                                                                           14 hours 
 FACTORS OF SPORTS TRAINING 
•Classification of Sports, Physical activity and physical exercises.  
•Exercise selection - General adaptation to Physical exercises. 
• Additional means of training - Application of knowledge of sports performance  
•Speed, Agility and Quickness: Forms of speed in various sports –  
FACTORS DETERMINING SPEED ABILITY  
•Heredity  
• Reaction time  
•Muscle composition and elasticity  
• Flexibility - Warm-up  
•Psychic factors  
• Biomechanical factors  
•Methods of developing speed  
• Load intensity   
•Work interval  
• Rest interval  
•Number of repetitions  
•Way of rest  
•Training frequency 
UNIT-V                                                                                            8 hours 
MEASUREMENT OF PHYSICAL FITNESS AND MOTOR FITNESS: 
Tuttle Pulse Ratio Test, 
 Harvard Step Test, 
Cooper’s 12 Minutes Run / Walk Test. 
 AAHPER Youth Fitness Test 
JCR Test 
Kraus – Weber Muscular Fitness Test   
Course outcomes: 
1: To give knowledge and skills to enter the fitness industry as a skilled strength and 
conditioning expert 
2: To demonstrate professional practice with moral values and ethical principles of training 
3: To provide relevant practice parameters for Strength & Conditioning professionals to 
utilize when carrying out their responsibilities in providing services to athletes or other 
participants. 
4.Gain knowledge on basic physical fitness 
5.Sports specific training 
Text books: 
1.Hoeger W.W.K, Fitness and Wellness, Human Kinetics Publishers.  
2.Baechle T.R., Essentials Of Strength Training And Conditioning, 3/E. Human Kinetics 
Publishers 
3Dick W. Frank, Sports Training Principles 4thed. (London: A&C Black Ltd.),2002. 
4.Anderson ,Foundations of Athletic Training, 6e (HB), Human Kinetics Publishers  
5.NASM , NASM Essentials of Sports Performance Training, First Edition Revised, Human 
Kinetics Publishers 
Reference books: 
1.Derek Hansen, Steve Kennelly, Plyometric Anatomy, Human KineticsPublishers 
2.Tuder B. Bompa& Mihal C. Carera, Periodiation Training for Sports, HumanKinetics,2005 
(IInd Edition) 
3.Sreedhar. K., Sports Training Methods, Chidambaram, Sowmi Publications, 2007.Clive 
Brewer, Athletic Movement Skills: Training for Sports Performance, Human Kinetics 
Publishers. 
4.Lee E. Brown,Vance Ferrigno ,Training for Speed, Agility, and Quickness, Human Kinetics 
Publishers. 
5.Mike McGuigan, PhD, CSCS ,Monitoring Training and Performance in Athletes, Human 
Kinetics Publishers. 
6.Marie Dunford, PhD, RD ,Fundamentals of Sport and Exercise Nutrition, Human Kinetics 
Publishers. 
7.Steven B. Heymsfield, Timothy G. Lohman, ZiMian Wang, Scott B. Going, , Human Body 
Composition, Second Edition, Human Kinetics Publishers. 
8.National Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA) Bill I. Campbell, Marie A. Spano, 
,NSCA’s Guide to Sport and Exercise Nutrition, Human Kinetics Publishers. 
9.Kang , Nutrition and Metabolism in Sports, Exercise and Health, Human Kinetics 
Publishers. 
10.Fink, Practical Applications in Sports Nutrition, 5/Ed, Human Kinetics Publishers. 
11.S.S. Roy, Sports Management: Friends Publications: New Delhi. 
12.Samiran Chakrabarty, Sports Management: Sports Publications: Delhi, 1998. 
13.ACSM, ACSM's Health-Related Physical Fitness Assessment Manual, 5Ed, Human 
Kinetics Publishers. 
14.Vern Gambetta ,Athletic Development: The Art & Science of Functional Sports 
Conditioning, Human Kinetics Publishers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAMME ELECTIVE-II(PE-II) SPINAL MANIPULATIONS 
  BPTT4602b                                                                                                              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                     3 0 0 3 
Course description: 
This course enables the candidate to develop the ability to assess the somatic assessment and 
for various musculoskeletal conditions. This program provides knowledge in learning the 
principles, concepts and different school of thought of various manual therapy techniques 
which enhances better hands-on practices for various musculoskeletal disorders. This 
program also enhances more realistic, evidence based practice and multifactorial approach to 
the examination and treatment procedure in order to address the musculoskeletal pain. 
Course objectives: 
1. Understanding the anatomy, pathoanatomy and age related changes of the spinal column,  
pelvic complex. 
2.Proficient in applying spinal column, pelvic complex, examination procedures. 
3.Determining a differential diagnosis based on an integrated examination of the joint, muscle 
and neural systems. 
4.Proficient in applying an appropriate manual therapy treatment strategy incorporating 
manual treatment techniques and specific exercise 
5.Specific exercise programmes to prevent contractures and deformities. 
UNIT-I                                                                                               8 hours 
INTRODUCTION TO SPINAL MANIPULATION 
 Overview of spinal anatomy and biomechanics (Introduction to Spinal Mobilization 
Techniques ,Anatomical Considerations for Spinal Mobilization, Principles of Manual 
Therapy) - Historical context and evolution of spinal manipulation techniques - Principles and goals of spinal manipulation - Safety considerations and contraindications 
UNIT-II                                                                                            12 hours 
ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS - Patient assessment techniques for spinal disorders 
1. Assessment Procedures for Spinal Mobility, Precautions and Contraindications, 
Patient Positioning for Spinal Mobilization, Soft Tissue Techniques for Spinal Mobilization, 
Articular Techniques for Spinal Mobilization, Combined Movement Techniques, Clinical 
Applications and Case Studies, Safety and Risk Management, Integration with Exercise 
Therapy, Recent Advances in Spinal Mobilization Techniques,Patient Education and Home 
Exercises, Documentation and Evaluation of Treatment Outcomes - Differential diagnosis of spinal conditions - Imaging modalities in spinal assessment - Case studies and practical exercises 
UNIT-III                                                                                          10 hours 
MANUAL TECHNIQUES FOR SPINAL MOBILIZATION - Introduction to various manual mobilization techniques (e.g., soft tissue mobilization, joint 
mobilization) - Application of mobilization techniques to different regions of the spine (cervical, thoracic, 
lumbar) - Hands-on practice sessions with supervision and feedback 
UNIT-IV                                                                                          10 hours  
HIGH-VELOCITY LOW-AMPLITUDE (HVLA) THRUST TECHNIQUES - Theory and principles behind HVLA thrust techniques 
1.Introduction to HVLA Thrust Techniques, Biomechanical Principles of HVLA Thrust, 
Historical Development and Evolution, Safety Considerations and Precautions, 
Contraindications for HVLA Thrust, Patient Assessment and Screening, Patient Positioning 
for HVLA Thrust, Technique Selection and Application, Force Application and Direction, 
Combination with Soft Tissue Techniques, Integration with Exercise Therapy - Indications and contraindications for HVLA thrust techniques - Demonstration and practice of HVLA thrust techniques on spine models and simulated 
patients - Risk management and patient communication during HVLA procedures 
UNIT-V                                                                                              5 hours 
INTEGRATION AND ADVANCED CONCEPTS - Integrating spinal manipulation into comprehensive treatment plans - Advanced techniques and variations in spinal manipulation 
- Special populations and considerations (e.g., pediatric, geriatric, pregnant patients) - Ethical and legal aspects of spinal manipulation practice 
Course Outcomes: 
1.Understanding the anatomy, pathoanatomy and age related changes of the spinal column, 
pelvic complex. 
2.Proficient in applying spinal column, pelvic complex, neural, muscle examination 
procedures. 
3.Determining a differential diagnosis based on an integrated examination of the joint, muscle 
and neural systems. 
4.Proficient in applying an appropriate manual therapy treatment strategy incorporating 
manual treatment techniques and specific exercise 
5.Specific exercise programmes to prevent contractures and deformities 
Text books: 
1.Clinical Biomechanics of the Spine" by Augustus A. White III and Manohar M. Panjabi: 
This textbook provides a comprehensive overview of the biomechanics of the spine, 
including how various manipulative techniques affect spinal structures. 
2.Orthopaedic Manual Therapy" by Chad Cook: While not exclusively focused on spinal 
manipulations, this book covers a wide range of manual therapy techniques, including those 
used for the spine. 
3.The Lumbar Spine: Mechanical Diagnosis & Therapy" by Robin McKenzie: This book 
focuses on the McKenzie Method of Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy (MDT), which 
includes assessment and treatment techniques for various spinal conditions. 
4.Manual Therapy of the Extremities" by Stanley Paris and Timothy W. Flynn: Though it 
primarily deals with extremity manual therapy, it also discusses spinal manipulation 
techniques and their applications. 
Reference books : 
1."Textbook of Clinical Chiropractic: A Specific Biomechanical Approach" by Gregory 
Plaugher: This textbook offers insights into chiropractic techniques, including spinal 
manipulative therapy, from a clinical perspective. 
2.Orthopaedic Manual Physical Therapy: From Art to Evidence" by Christopher H. Wise and 
Jeffrey D. Robinson: This book provides an evidence-based approach to manual therapy, 
including spinal manipulations, integrating research findings into clinical practice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 