 
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
DIVISION OF ALLIED HEALTH SCIENCES 
SCHOOL OF HEALTH SCIENCES 
 
 
COURSE STRUCTURE & SYLLABI 
(B.Sc.EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 
FOR 2023, 2024 & 2025 ADMITTED BATCH  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VISION 
 
The Apollo University aspires to create knowledge, thought leadership, 
and global leaders for the future, preparing them for a constantly 
evolving world and empowering them to build a healthier and more 
equitable society.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MISSION  
 
The Mission is to achieve this vision through transformative education, 
developed at the intersection of healthcare, science, technology, and 
management, having roots in innovation & research, in an inclusive 
culture that fosters practical oriented knowledge, stimulates critical 
thinking and sustains our legacy of pioneering and excellence, for the 
benefit of humanity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES (PEO) 
 
 
PEO-1  Enhancing Clinical Skills:   Providing students with hands-on training and simulation 
exercises to enhance their clinical skill.  
PEO-2  
Improving Decision-making Abilities: Teaching students to think quickly and make sound 
decisions under pressure, as time is often of the essence in emergency situations.  
PEO-3  
Developing Communication and Teamwork:  Emphasizing the importance of clear 
communication and effective teamwork among healthcare providers,   
PEO-4  
Promoting Efficient Triage:  Instructing students in the process of triaging patients based on 
the severity of their injuries or illnesses, ensuring that those in the most critical condition 
receive immediate attention.  
PEO–5  
Familiarity with Technology and Equipment: Training students in the use of advanced 
medical equipment and technology commonly used in emergency and trauma care settings, 
such as defibrillators, cardiac monitors, ventilators, and more.  
PEO-6  
Pre-hospital Care: Equipping students with the knowledge and skills to provide pre-hospital 
care, including emergency medical services (EMS) and ambulance operations.  
PEO-7   Disaster Preparedness: Educating students about disaster preparedness and response, as 
they may be involved in managing mass casualty incidents.  
PEO-8   Continuous Professional Development: Encouraging a commitment to continuous learning 
and staying updated with the latest advancements in emergency and trauma care practices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM OUTCOMES (PO) 
 
PO1 :  Clinical care: Organize and implement the prescribed preventive, investigative and management 
plans;  and will offer care and appropriate follow-up services to patients in a cost-effective way.  
  
PO2: Communication: Communicate effectively and appropriately with patients/clients, caregivers, 
other health professionals and other members of the community.  
  
PO3 : Membership of a multidisciplinary health team: Function effectively as an individual, and as a 
member in multidisciplinary healthcare teams to accomplish shared goals within and across settings to 
achieve coordinated, high-quality care.  
  
PO4 : Ethics and accountability at all levels: Understand the core concept of clinical ethics and law so 
that they may apply these to their practice as healthcare service providers.  
 
PO5: Commitment to professional excellence: Execute professionalism and reflect technical 
competence, appearance, empathy, compassion, honour, and integrity in his/her thought and action to 
ensure the safe delivery of healthcare.  
 
PO6 :Leadership and Mentorship: Demonstrate leadership qualities where needed in order to ensure 
clinical productivity and patient satisfaction in an autonomous and confident manner.  
 
PO7 : Social accountability and responsibility: Recognize that allied health professionals need to 
judiciously manage resources and promote innovation and sustainability to provide optimal patient care 
in a socially responsible manner.  
 
PO8 :Scientific attitude and scholarship: To be engaged in evidence-based practice, and need- based 
research studies and to apply and disseminate research findings and knowledge for improving the 
quality of care.  
 
PO9 : Lifelong learning: Recognize the need and have the ability to engage in independent and 
continuous lifelong learning and improvement in skills and knowledge while harnessing modern tools 
and technology for the advancement of self and profession.  
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM SPECIFIC OUTCOMES (PSO) 
 
PSO-1  
Ability to implement the knowledge of the technologies associated with Emergency medicine 
for sustainable professional career  
PSO-2  Ability to comprehend and communicate effectively with in a multidisciplinary working 
environment in the context of the emerging technologies.  
PSO–3  Ability to acquire technical and managerial skill that makes them an employable graduate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS 
SCOPE: 
This Academic regulation provide a framework for the regulatory guidelines of all programs offered by 
The Apollo University. It includes procedures and practices that are to be followed to ensure academic 
standards in the University. The regulations are approved by the Academic Council. These regulations 
may be amended from time to time with the approval of the Academic council for the benefit of students 
or some times to reflect the changes suggested by the statutory bodies.  
Information regarding amendments (if any) to the regulations will be communicated to the students by 
publishing in the University website. Students must follow the amended regulations as they 
might impact the process for the award of degree. The decision of the Vice Chancellor shall be the final 
in case of any discrepancy. These regulations apply to all students, despite the program of study. 
 
1. ADMISSION INTO THE PROGRAM 
The University admits the students in two modes. One through the convenor quota as per the Andhra 
Pradesh Private Universities Act, for which the admissions will be carried out through the convener 
quota by the Govt of Andhra Pradesh. The other is through University quota for which the following 
procedure will be followed: 
A. The applicant shall satisfy the entrance requirements specified by The Apollo University 
and in accordance with guidelines of statutory councils for Under-graduation.  
B. The Applicant shall be qualified in the qualifying examination for a particular program. 
C. The Applicant secures a rank in national level entrance exam or suitable such test 
conducted by The Apollo University / professional body.  
D. The Applicant qualifies in the specified state or national level examinations prescribed by 
The Apollo University. 
 
The Apollo University will widely notify the counselling schedule for admissions into the academic 
programs in the media. The provisional admission will be given to the eligible students during the 
counselling scheduled by Apollo University. The selected candidates will be provisionally admitted into 
the program of his/her choice if the candidate meets the program specific requirements in addition to 
academic performance qualifying exam. Admission is purely based on merit and so merely meeting the 
requirements will not ensure admission. The University does not discriminate based on gender, race, 
region, religion, disability or nationality.   The University reserves the right to make admissions based on 
various criteria which is specified in the admission brochure.   
 
 
 
2. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
Undergraduate programs  
The qualifying exam eligibility for each program is given Annexure 1. The student should have passed 
the qualifying exam either in the year the student is seeking admission or the previous year.  
Convener Quota: The student seeking admission to any program under convener quota shall qualify in 
the relevant entrance exam conducted by the Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
University Quota:  For getting admission under University quota, percentage of marks obtained in the 
qualifying exam, the rank obtained in TAU entrance exam or any recognized national level examination 
in the year of admission will be considered.  
Counselling 
All the eligible students need to apply for admission and have to attend counselling conducted by TAU 
as per the schedule for the university quota.  
3. PROGRAMS 
The Apollo University offers variety of programs which includes certificate, undergraduate, 
postgraduate, and Research.  The list of programs on offer for the academic year 2023-24 are annexed in 
Annexure 2.  
Minimum duration of the program 
The minimum duration of each program depends on the type of program, viz., undergraduate, 
postgraduate, integrated programs, etc., and the faculty which offers the program. The maximum 
duration of the program is N+2 years, where N stands for the minimum duration of the program as 
mentioned in Annexure 2. If the student has not obtained the minimum number of credits within the 
stipulated time, the Vice-Chancellor may extend the maximum duration in extenuating circumstances 
upon receiving a request along with reasons from the student for not completing the program on time. 
 
4. CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM 
The choice-based credit system (CBCS) facilitates the education student-centric. It provides the 
opportunity for the learner to choose the courses from a basket of core, elective, and skill enhanced 
courses. All programs of study are designed to meet the specified number of credit requirements. The 
courses taken by the student in each semester as part of program are allotted some credit points based on 
the number of hours assigned. Upon successful completion of the course, the student secures the number 
of credits allotted for that course. Once the minimum number of credits of the program is achieved, the 
degree can be awarded, subject to fulfilment of all other relevant conditions. 
5. STRUCTURE OF THE PROGRAM 
 The Program structure Consists of 
i) University Courses 
 
 A. University Core 
 B. University Electives 
ii) Faculty Courses 
 A. Faculty Core 
 B. Faculty Electives  
iii) Program Courses 
 A. Program Core 
 B. Program electives  
Each course* is assigned a certain number of credits depending upon the number of contact hours 
(lectures/tutorials/practical) per week.  (*one course means one subject) 
Core Courses = 3 Credits /4 Credits  Elective =3 Credits 
In general, credits are assigned to the courses as detailed below: 
 A classroom lecture/ tutorial of 60 min (1 hr) duration per week, spread over the entire 
semester, shall be considered as one credit.  
 A laboratory session of minimum of 120 min (2 hr) per week shall be considered as one credit.  
 A project work/ Internship session of 60 minutes (1 hr) carried out per week shall be 
considered as one credit. 
6. MEDIUM OF INSTRUCTION 
The medium of instruction (including examinations and project reports) shall be English. 
7. REGISTRATION 
Any of the following student must register for the courses opted in a particular semester during the 
scheduled registration period.  
i. a new student who enrols into any program  
ii. an existing student who is continuing on rolls from the preceding regular semester  
iii. a former student, i.e., who has not enrolled in the preceding regular semester or who has availed 
academic break or detained and got readmission  
Each newly admitted student shall attend an induction/ orientation program prior to commencement of 
the first semester. During this program academic advisors assist the students in choosing the courses. 
Existing student may register online by using their registration number and mail ID through the Apollo 
ERP portal. Class schedules are available approximately two weeks before the beginning of every 
semester for each program. The concerned head of the department must approve class schedule.   
8. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS 
 Students should earn a minimum of 80% attendance in the current semester to become eligible to 
write the Semester End Examinations. 
 The monthly statement of attendance will be displayed on the Department Notice Board/ Apollo 
 
ERP by the respective departments within the first five working days of the following month. 
 Candidates who are falling short of 80% attendance will be detained on the recommendation of 
the HoD and are not eligible to appear for the current semester examinations. The students 
who are detained in the current semester will not be allowed to register for the next semester and 
they have to repeat the same semester by paying the tuition fee prescribed. However, they can 
write arrear subjects, if any.  
9. EVALUATION 
 The assessment of the student’s performance in a Theory course shall be based on two components: 
Continuous Evaluation (40 marks) and Semester-end examination (60 marks). A student has to secure an 
aggregate of 40% in the course in the two components put together to be declared to have passed the 
course, subject to the condition that the candidate must have secured a minimum of 24 marks (i.e. 40%) 
in the theory component at the semester-end examination. Clinical Skill/Practical/ Project Work/ 
Industrial Training/ Viva voce/ Seminar etc. are completely assessed as Continuous Evaluation (80 
marks) and Semester-end examination (20 marks) put together a maximum of 100 marks, and a student 
has to obtain a minimum of 50% to secure Pass Grade. For courses having both theory and practical 
components, 60% of the weightage will be given for theory component and 40% weightage for practical 
component. The student must secure 40% (Theory + Practical) with 24 marks minimum in theory to 
attain pass grade.  
 Details of Assessment Procedure are furnished below in Table 1. 
Table 1: Assessment Procedure 
S. No. Component of 
Assessment 
Marks 
Allotted 
Type of 
Assessment 
Scheme of Evaluation 
1 Theory 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
Continuous 
Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Semester-end 
Examination 
i)  Twenty (20) marks for mid 
examinations. Three mid 
examinations shall be conducted for 
20 marks each; average of the best 
two performances shall be taken into 
consideration. 
ii)  Ten (10) marks for Quizzes, 
Assignments and Presentations.  
iii)  Ten (10) marks for   periodic 
evaluation, case studies and projects  
iv)  Sixty (60) marks for Semester-end 
examinations 
 Total 100   
 
2 Laboratory 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
1) 80 marks with equal weightage to all 
experiments subject to conduct of 
minimum of 10 experiments  
2) 20 marks for the end exam (with one 
of our university teachers as external 
other than course teacher) 
3 Internship 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
i) (80) marks for periodic evaluation  
of Internship report by the Project 
Supervisor. 
ii) Twenty (20) marks for final Report 
presentation and Viva-voce, by a panel of 
internal examiners. 
iii) Students shall undergo TWO 
internships during the course of time and 
the evaluation shall be done during final 
semester. 
4 Project work  100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
i) (80) marks for periodic evaluation and 
technical report writing by the Project 
Supervisor. 
ii) Twenty (20) marks for final Report 
presentation and Viva-voce, by a panel of 
internal examiners 
 
GRADING SYSTEM 
 Based on the student performance during a given semester, a final letter grade will be awarded at the 
end of the semester in each course. The letter grades and the corresponding grade points are as given in 
Table 2. 
Table 2: Grades & Grade Points 
Sl. No. Grade Grade Points Absolute Marks 
1 O(Outstanding) 10 90 and above 
2 A+(Excellent) 9 80 to 89 
3 A (Very Good) 8 70 to 79 
4 B+(Good) 7 60 to 69 
5 B (Above Average) 6 50 to 59 
6 C(Average) 5 45 to 49 
 
 
SEMESTER GRADEPOINTAVERAGE (SGPA) 
 A Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) for the semester will be calculated according to the 
formula: 
 
 𝐺𝑃𝐴∑ [ 𝐶 𝑋 𝐺 ]
∑ 𝐶 
Where 
C = Number of credits for the course, 
G = Grade points obtained by the student in the course. 
 A student who earns a minimum of 4 grade points (P grade) in a course is declared to have 
successfully completed the course, and is deemed to have earned the credits assigned to that course. 
CUMULATIVE GRADE POINT AVEARGE (CGPA) 
 A similar formula is used to arrive at Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA), considering the 
student’s performance in all the courses taken in all the semesters up to the particular point of time. 
 Table 3 shows the CGPA required for the award of class after the successful completion of the 
program. 
Table3: CGPA required for award of Class 
Class CGPA Required 
First Class with Distinction >8.0* 
First Class >6.5 
Second Class >5.5 
Pass Class >5.0 
 
*In addition to the required CGPA of 8.0 or more, the student must have necessarily passed all the 
courses of every semester in first attempt. 
 
11. REAPPEARANCE 
a. A student who has secured ‘F’ grade in a Theory course shall have to reappear at the 
subsequent Semester end examination held for that course. 
b. A student who has secured ‘F’ grade in a Practical course shall have to attend Special 
Instruction Classes scheduled by the Department for securing pass. 
c. A student who has secured ‘F’ Grade in Internship /Project work / Industrial Training etc 
shall have to reappear for Viva – voce scheduled by the department. 
7 P(Pass) 4 40 to 44 
8 F(Fail) 0 Less than 40 
9 Ab. (Absent) 0 - 
 
d. A student who is declared fail (F) in a course/s can apply for revaluation within one week 
from the date of publication of results with a fee prescribed by the university. The marks 
/grade awarded in the revaluation is final. 
11.1 PROCEDURE FOR REVALUATION 
 The students who have not satisfied with the marks awarded by the examiner 
            can apply for revaluation of his/her answer script/s  
 The students have to apply through proper channel for revaluation and to pay the revaluation fee 
per paper to the university towards revaluation fee. 
 Students have to apply for revaluation within 7 days from the date  
           publication of result. 
 The scripts will get valued by second examiner and if the difference is more than  
15 marks, they will get valued by the third examiner. The average of the nearest 
two marks will be declared as the final marks. 
11.2 ASSESSMENT MECHANISM  
The Apollo University offers a student the benefits of Choice Based Credit System. Every paper is 
allotted a certain number of credits as per the UGC norms. A student is awarded the specified credits 
on obtaining a pass in the respective paper. 
 
The Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) has been adopted for UG Course from the year 2021-22 
onwards as per the recommendations of the A.P. State Council for Higher Education (APSCHE). The 
structure of undergraduate programmes provides a wide range of choice for students to opt for courses 
based on their eligibility, aptitude and career goals. 
  
 
11.3 SEMESTER END EXAMINATION 
The End semester examination will be a comprehensive examination of 3 hours duration. Two End 
Semester examinations are conducted in a year- 
Odd semester examinations in November/ December and  
Even semester examination in May/June  
Practical examination / Project viva will be held 2 weeks prior to the theory semester  
end examinations. 
Under-Graduation Programs  
 
Course 
 
    Continuous Assessment 
 
End semester 
Aggregate in End 
semester Examinations 
All UG Courses No passing minimum 40% 40% 
 
11.4 POST EVALUATION PROGRAMME:  
Under the Post Evaluation Programme there are three menus: 
 Provision for improvement 
 Re-totalling and Revaluation of answer scripts 
 Restrictions to appear for the examinations 
 
11.5 PROVISION FOR IMPROVEMENT: 
A student who passes a paper in the first attempt can reappear for the same paper in the succeeding End
of-Semester examination only, for improving his/her marks. Re-appearance for improvement is allowed 
for theory and practical subjects of all semesters, except for the final semester subjects. Revised mark 
statement will be issued after withdrawing the previous one, if the marks obtained in improvement are 
higher than the marks awarded earlier. When there is no improvement, there shall not be any change in 
the original marks already awarded. The improved marks shall be considered for classification but not 
for ranking. 
Provision for Re-totalling and Revaluation of valued answer scripts 
 UG candidates may apply for re-totalling / revaluation of valued answer scripts, to the 
Controller of Examinations through the Heads of Departments and Principal / Dean, in 
the prescribed forms, remitting the prescribed fee within 7 days from the date of 
publication of results. Revaluation of answer scripts is permissible only for the current 
semester papers and not for any arrear paper. 
 Those wish to apply for revaluation of final semester papers can do so within five days 
from the date of publication of results. In re-valuation, the answer papers will be valued 
by an external examiner and if there is a difference of 15 marks between the two 
 
evaluations then the script will be sent for third valuation which is final and the mark 
awarded by the third examiner   will be taken into the account. 
 Revised mark statement will be issued after withdrawing the previous one, if the marks 
obtained in revaluation / retotalling are higher than the marks obtained earlier. In other 
cases, the original marks obtained earlier will be retained and the matter will be intimated 
to the student concerned as ‘No change’. 
 A candidate who applies for revaluation should not apply for retotalling. 
 
RESTRICTIONS TO APPEAR FOR THE EXAMINATIONS 
Candidates who fail in any of the papers in the UG End semester examinations shall complete the paper 
concerned within N+2 years from the date of admission to the particular course. If they fail to do so, they 
shall re-register their names and take the examination in the texts/revised regulations/syllabus of the 
paper prescribed for the subsequent batch of candidates, in force at the time of their reappearance.  In the 
event of removal of that paper consequent to change of regulation and/or curriculum after N+2 years 
period, the candidate shall have to take up an equivalent paper in the revised syllabus as suggested by the 
Chairman, Board of Studies concerned. 
12. BETTERMENT OF GRADES 
A student who has secured only a Pass or Second class and desires to improve his/her Class can appear 
for Betterment Examinations only in Theory courses of any Semester of his/her choice, conducted in 
Summer Vacation along with the Special Examinations. Betterment of Grades is permitted ‘only once’ 
immediately after completion of the program of study. 
13. DETENTION AND RE-ADMISSION 
If a student fails to meet the minimum attendance requirement or minimum standards for academic 
progression, the concerned academic head will recommend for detention and it will be notified by the 
concerned Dean of the School. The students who are detained in the current semester will not be allowed 
to register for the next semester and they have to repeat the same semester.   
The candidates who are detained or availed academic break or suspended in the previous 
semester/academic year and want to continue their study shall apply for re-admission to the university. 
The candidates shall request for re-admission to the respective Head of the Department, with details viz., 
Full Name, Registration Number, Department, School, Fee payment particulars with proofs and reasons 
for discontinuations. The concerned academic head will forward it to the Registrar with specific 
comments. The Registrar will notify the decision of re-admission which shall include the prescribed fee 
particulars, semester/ year into which readmission is granted and additional courses to be completed by 
the student (if any). The candidates should apply for re-admission in advance, that is before the 
commencement of the semester.   
14. GROOMING AND ATTIRE FOR STUDENTS  
 
Grooming and Etiquette is of great significance in the dynamic of shaping one’s Personality. The Apollo 
University stands by a Code of Grooming, Attire and Etiquette that promotes a professional standard: 
Academic Day; Campus Placements and Non-Academic Hours on Campus. 
The Dress Code to be in compliance on academic premises while attending: Formal Functions of the 
Institution / Lectures / Practicals / Dining Area / Library / Labs / Office Areas. 
Students shall follow appropriate attire during Academic and Non-Academic hours on  the campus. 
Students shall wear clean, neat, pressed and presentable clothing, and command respect by dressing in 
accordance with responsible personal norms. Students shall always wear The Apollo University ID Card 
with the Lanyard. 
Grooming and Formal Wear - Boys: 
Formal Shirts / T-Shirts with a Collar should preferably be tucked in with a Formal pair of Pants Shoes 
and Socks to complete the Formal Attire. Personal Hygiene should be followed and Hair should be well 
groomed. 
Smart Casuals for Boys: 
Long Kurtas / Formals / Semi-Formal Shirts with Jeans. 
Grooming and Formal Wear - Girls: Sarees / Salwar Suits / Leggings or Jeggings with Long Kurtis / 
Long Frocks / Long Skirts / Palazzos. Complement the outfit with proper footwear. Personal Hygiene 
should be followed and Hair should be well groomed. 
Smart Casuals for Girls: 
Jeans with long Kurtis / Long Skirts / Long Frocks. 
Attire for Non-Academic Hours On Campus: 
The students should be neatly attired during Non-Academic Hours on Campus. 
Dress Code for Boys: 
Jeans / Track Suits / T-Shirts / Trousers / Shirts. 
Dress Code for Girls: 
Jeans / T-Shirts or Blouses / Salwar Suits / Palazzos / Leggings or Jeggings with Long Tops / Sarees / 
Long Skirts / Track Suits. 
DO’S AND DONT’S FOR BOYS AND GIRL STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY: 
 To wear modest clothing that reflects the essence of good personal grooming standards. 
 To refrain from wearing Sleeveless Clothing; Shorts; Short Tops, etc., 
 
PLEASE NOTE: The decision as to what constitutes Appropriate Attire vests with the Authorities of 
The Apollo University. 
15. ELIGIBILITY FOR AWARD OF THE DEGREE 
The undergraduate degree will be of 4-years/ 3-years(Lateral Entry) of duration. A student shall be 
declared as eligible for the award of the degree if the candidate has successfully secured the minimum 
 
number of required credits as specified in the curriculum corresponding to the branch          of his/her study 
within the stipulated time. 
After successful completion of the program, a provisional certificate cum memorandum of grades 
(PCMG) will be issued to the students. The PCMG includes the secured grades and class achieved in 
chosen program and specialization if any, along with grades and CGPA secured by the student. The 
original degree will be presented in the subsequent convocation.  
16. DISCRETION POWER  
Not with-standing anything contained in the above sections, the Vice Chancellor may review all 
exceptional cases, and give his decision, which will be final and binding. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 1 
   ELIGIBILTY FOR QUALIFYING EXAM FOR UNDER GRADUATE PROGRAMS 
Program 
Type Program Name Eligibility 
Bachelor's Emergency Medical 
Technology 
Passed with at least 45% (40% in case the candidates 
belong to reserved category) marks with Botany, 
Zoology, Physics and Chemistry or Inter vocational with 
Bridge course of Biological and Physical Sciences (or) 
APOSS with Biological Sciences and Physical Sciences 
from a recognized board or other equivalent board or 
Intermediate and attain 17 Years as on 31st December of 
Calendar Year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 2 
PROGRAMS OFFERED BY THE DIVISION OF ALLIED HEALTH SCIENCES 
FROM THE ACADEMIC YEAR 2023-24 
Sl. 
No. Program Expanded Level Minimum Duration 
in Years (N) 
1.  B.Sc. PAT B.Sc. Physician Assistant Bachelor’s 4 
2.  B.Sc. MLT B.Sc. Medical Lab 
Technology Bachelor’s 4 
3.  B.Sc. IMT B.Sc. Imaging Technology Bachelor’s 4 
4.  B.Sc. AOTT B.Sc. Anaesthesiology and 
Operation Technology Bachelor’s 4 
5.  B.Sc. RDT 
B.Sc. Renal Dialysis 
Technology Bachelor’s 4 
6.  B.Sc. RTT B.Sc. Respiratory Therapy 
Technology Bachelor’s 4 
7.  B.Sc. EMT B.Sc. Emergency Medical 
Technology Bachelor’s 4 
8.  BOPT Bachelors in optometry Bachelor’s 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
B.Sc. EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY 
PROGRAMME STRUCTURE 
 
I - Semester 
3 Week Induction Programme 
 
Course 
Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours per week L T P 
AHSJ1301 Anatomy 3 1 2 5 6 
AHSJ1302 Physiology 3 1 2 5 6 
AHSJ1303 Biochemistry 3 1 2 5 6 
TAUT1101 University Core -I (Communicative English) 3 0 0 3 3 
 University Elective I 3 0 0 3 3 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- Co-curricular activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Self- Learning 0 0 0 0 2 
 Seminar 0 0 0 0 2 
TOTAL 15 3 6 21 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University Elective – I 
Semester – I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. No Name of the Course Host Department 
1 Basics of Physiotherapy School of Health Sciences – 
Physiotherapy 
2 Biostatistics School of Health Sciences – BMS 
& GMB 
3 Constitution of India School of Social Sciences 
4 Ethical Hacking School of Technology - CSE 
5 Fundamentals of Computers School of Technology - CSE 
6 Gender and Development School of Social Sciences 
7 Leadership Development School of Management 
8 Mathematical Thinking School of Technology 
9 Nursing Apollo Institute of Nursing 
10 One Health School of Health Sciences – PH 
11 Basic emergency care and life support skills  School of Health Sciences – AHS 
12 Basics of Health Management  School of Health Sciences – AHS 
13 Entrepreneurship School of Management 
14 Managerial Economics School of Management 
15 Organic Farming School of Health Sciences – BMS 
& GMB 
16 Personality Development School of Health Sciences – 
Psychology 
17 Social Entrepreneurship School of Management 
 
II - Semester 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
Hours 
per 
week L T P 
AHSJ1304 Microbiology 3 1 2 5 6 
AHSJ1305 Pathology 3 1 2 5 6 
AHSJ1306 Pharmacology 3 1 2 5 6 
TAUT1102 University Core-II (Environmental studies) 3 0 0 3 3 -- University Elective-II 3 0 0 3 3 
EMTT1501 Fundamentals of EMT 3 0 0 3 3 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 -- Physical Activity 0 0 0 0 2 -- Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 -- Self-Learning 0 0 0 0 2 -- Seminar 0 0 0 0 1 
TOTAL 18 3 6 24 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University Elective – II 
Semester – II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. No Name of the Course 
Indian Languages 
1 Telugu  
2 Tamil 
3 Hindi 
4 Professional English 
Foreign Languages 
5 French 
6 German 
7 Spanish 
8 Japanese 
 
 
III SEMESTER 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
Hours per week 
L T P 
EMTT2501 Principles of Trauma Care 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTT2502 Introduction to Clinical Practice 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTT2503 Paramedic Training -I 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTL2501 Clinical Skills-  I 0 0 12 6 12 
TAUT2101 University core -III  
(Health and wellness) 3 0 0 3 3 
 University elective-III 3 0 0 3 3 
 Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 
 Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 
 Library 0 0 0 0 1 
 Seminar 0 0 0 0 1 
 Self-Learning 0 0 0 0 1 
TOTAL 15 3 12 24 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University Elective – III 
Semester – III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. No Name of the Course Host Department  
1 Community Engagement School of Social Sciences 
2 Clinical Nutrition School of Health Sciences – 
BMS & GMB 
3 Emotional Intelligence & Mental Health School of Health Sciences – 
Psychology 
4 Human Rights School of Social Sciences 
5 Industry 4.0 School of Technology – CSE 
6 Medical Terminology School of Health Sciences – 
BMS & GMB 
7 Social Network Analysis School of Health Sciences – 
PH 
8 Antibiotic Resistance & Biomedical Waste 
Management 
School of Health Sciences – 
AHS 
9 Behavior Change Communication School of Health Sciences – 
PH 
10 Disability Management School of Health Sciences – 
Psychology 
11 Disaster Management School of Social Sciences 
12 Human Values & Professional Ethics School of Social Sciences 
13 Infection Prevention & Control School of Health Sciences – 
AHS 
14 NSS & Youth Development School of Social Sciences 
 
 
IV SEMESTER 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
Hours per week 
L T P 
EMTT2504 Paramedic Training - II 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTT2505 Toxicology and Environmental 
Emergencies 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTT2506 Critical Care Management 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTL2502 Clinical Skills- II 0 0 20 10 20 
 Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 
 Extra-curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 
 Library 0 0 0 0 1 
TOTAL 9 3 20 22 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V  SEMESTER 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
Hours per week 
L T P 
EMTT3501 Obstetrics and Gynecological 
Emergencies 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTT3502 Paediatrics Emergencies 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTT3503 Surgical Emergencies 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTL3501 Clinical Skills  – III 0 0 16 8 16 
EMTT3601a 
EMTT3601b 
EMTT3601c 
Programme Elective - I 
1. Principles of Hospital Practice and 
Patient Care 
2. Critical concepts and decision 
making in Emergency medicine* 
3. Soft Skills and Clinical 
Communication skills* 
3 0 0 3 3 
 Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 
 Extra-Curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 
 Seminar 0 0 0 0 1 
 Library 0 0 0 0 1 
TOTAL 12 3 16 23 36 
 
*Applicable from 2024 Admitted Batches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI SEMESTER 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
Hours per week 
L T P 
EMTT3504 Orthopaedic Emergencies 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTT3505 Pre-Hospital care 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTT3506 Disaster Management 3 1 0 4 4 
EMTL 3502 Clinical Skills – IV 0 0 16 8 16 
EMTT3602a 
EMTT3602b 
EMTT3602c 
Programme Elective - II 
1. Medical Records 
2. Research Methodology and 
Biostatistics* 
3. Ambulance Services* 
3 0 0 3 3 
 Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 
 Extra-Curricular activities 0 0 0 0 2 
 Seminar 0 0 0 0 1 
 Library 0 0 0 0 1 
TOTAL 12 3 16 23 36 
 
*Applicable from 2024 Admitted Batches 
 
VII Semester 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
Hours per 
Semester L T P 
EMTI4501* Internship-I   48 25 1104 
TOTAL   48 25 1104 
 
VIII Semester 
 
Course Code 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
Hours per 
Semester L T P 
EMTI4502* Internship-II   48 25 1104 
EMTP4501 Project    8 6 180 
 
TOTAL   56 31 1284 
* Internship Evaluation can be Submitted at the end of the Year.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AHSJ1301                                       ANATOMY                                                 L   T   P C 
                                                                                                                                                    3   1   2  5 
Course Description: 
This course will cover anatomy with special emphasis on general anatomy including anatomical 
position, anatomical planes, cell structure, tissues and upper and lower limbs focusing on important 
muscles, arteries, veins, and nerves which are of significant clinical importance. This course also covers 
important and relevant anatomical knowledge of all systems namely nervous, cardiovascular, 
respiratory, gastrointestinal, reproductive, and excretory systems. 
This course also covers practical teaching of osteology, gross anatomy of important viscera, radiology 
and histology. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand and learn the origin, insertion, action, and nerve supply of clinically important 
muscles. 
2. Understand and learn the origin, course, branches and clinical aspects of important vessels and 
nerves. 
3. Explain the location, external features, relations, blood supply, clinical importance of organs of 
nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, reproductive, endocrine and excretory 
systems. 
 
THEORY                                                                                     
Total: 60 Hrs  
UNIT-I                  12Hrs                                                                                        
INTRODUCTION 
 Introduction to anatomy  
 Define Anatomy and list its sub-divisions. 
 Describe the Anatomical position. 
General Histology   
 Describe the human cell and its organelle. 
 Describe the types of cell division and give examples.  
 List out the types of tissues and describe their basic structure. 
 Briefly describe the types of connective tissue including specialized connective tissue 
 Describe the types and functions of epithelia. 
UPPER LIMB 
 Name the important bones, muscles, blood vessels & nerves of the upper limb. 
 
 Briefly describe the movements of joints and the nerve supply and actions of the important muscle 
groups of the upper limb 
 Describe the location and course of the major blood vessels & nerves of the upper limb. 
 
UNIT-II          12 Hrs                                                      
LOWER LIMB 
 Name the important bones, muscles, blood vessels & nerves of the lower limb  
 Briefly describe the movements of joints, nerve supply and actions of the important muscle groups 
of the lower limb  
 Describe the location and course of the major blood vessels & nerves of the lower limb 
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
 Name the parts of the respiratory system. 
 Briefly describe the pleura and its disposition  
 Describe the external features of the lungs and their relations. 
 Name the bronchopulmonary segments in each lung and explain their significance. 
 Briefly describe the mechanism of respiration  
 
UNIT-III          12 Hrs                                                                                                                       
 CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM                                                                                                                               
 Describe the important external and internal features of the heart.  
 Briefly describe the blood supply of the heart 
 Describe the circulation of blood through the heart and types of circulation. 
 Describe the aorta and its branches.  
 List out the major veins that join into the superior and inferior vena cavae. 
 Briefly describe the lymphatic system and its function 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 Classify nervous system.  
 Describe briefly the external and internal features of the spinal cord, its coverings and blood supply. 
 Describe briefly the external and internal features of the brainstem and the functional significance of 
the tracts and nuclei seen in the brainstem. 
 Briefly describe the cerebellum and its peduncles 
 Describe the cerebrum in brief and its lobes and functional areas of importance. 
  Briefly describe the circulation of cerebrospinal fluid 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                        12 Hrs                                                                                                              
  ENDOCRINE SYSTEM  
 
 Name the endocrine glands and the hormones secreted by each. 
 Briefly describe the anatomy and physiology of the pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, Adrenal, and 
pancreas. 
 REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM  
 Describe briefly the male reproductive system. 
 Describe briefly the female reproductive system. 
 List out the hormones released by the organs in the reproductive system. 
EXCRETORY SYSTEM 
 Describe briefly the excretory system. 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                            12 Hrs 
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM 
 Briefly describe the extent, important anatomical features, and relations of various parts of the 
gastrointestinal tract.  
 Describe the important anatomical features, surface anatomy, relations and functions, and blood 
supply of the liver. 
 Briefly describe the parts, important features and functions of the oesophagus, stomach, duodenum, 
small intestine, and large intestine. 
 Describe briefly the important anatomical features, position and relations and functions of pancreas 
and spleen. 
 Briefly describe the blood supply of the gastrointestinal system.         
                                                                                                                   
Course outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
 Explain the origin insertion, action, nerve supply, and clinical importance of muscles.  
 Understand and learn the origin, course, branches and clinical aspects of important vessels and 
nerves. 
 Explain the location, external features, relations, blood supply, and clinical importance of various 
organs of nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory, gastro-intestinal, reproductive, and excretory 
systems. 
 
PRACTICALS                                 Total: 30 Hrs 
 
Course Objective: The course will cover Anatomy with special emphasis on osteology, histology, 
demonstration of viscera, radiology. 
The assessment of the students will be undertaken with the help of following exercises. 
 
 Spotters 
 Viva 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Manipal manual of Human anatomy 
2. Human anatomy & Physiology for Nursing – Mahindra Kumar Anand & Meena Verma 
3. Understanding Human Anatomy & physiology – Willian Davis (McGraw Hill)  
4. Anatomy & physiology – Kaarna Muni Shekhar 
5. Textbook of Anatomy – Chaurasia  
6. Textbook of Anatomy – TS Ranganathan Human Anatomy – Fattana. 
Reference Books: 
1.Textbook of Anatomy-Vishram Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AHSJ1302              PHYSIOLOGY                                                                                            L   T   P C 
                                                                                                                                                                            3   1   2 5 
Course Description: The goal of this course is to help students in understanding functions, regulation, 
and integration of organ systems of the human body.  
Course Objectives: 
 Describe the concept of homeostasis. 
 Interpret the structure of the cell membrane and describe the transport mechanisms for solute and 
water across the cell membrane. Explain the basis of membrane potential.  
 Describe the structure and functional organization of the human nervous system and its 
subdivisions. Discuss the role of nervous system in homeostasis. 
 Understand how heart and blood vessels work to maintain a constant delivery of blood flow 
(oxygenated) to all the tissues and simultaneously how the blood is returned (deoxygenated/ 
venous blood) to the heart. Explain how cardiovascular system adjust its activity to meet the 
demands placed by the body during activities of daily life (E.g., exercise)   
 Describe the basic anatomy and functions of the pulmonary system. 
 Explain the role of kidney in blood pressure, electrolyte, and fluid homeostasis. 
 Elaborate on how the structure of gastrointestinal tract suited for digestion and absorption. 
Discuss the mechanism of digestion and absorption at various levels of gastrointestinal tract.   
 Describe how endocrine organs are involved in regulation of growth, metabolism, fluid and 
electrolyte balance and reproduction.  
                                                                         THEORY                                                     Total: 60 Hrs 
 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        10 Hrs 
1. General Physiology (Cell Physiology)  
 Homeostasis  
 Cell structure and functions of cell with special emphasis on characteristics of cell membranes, 
Transport mechanisms across cell membrane. 
 Body Fluid Compartments (volume, composition, and units to measure solute concentration).  
2. Nerve-Muscle Physiology 
 
 Neuron (structure and function), Classification of neurons, Neuroglia, Type of nerve fibers, 
Resting membrane potential and Action potential.  
 Neuromuscular Junction (skeletal muscle) and Neuromuscular blocking drugs  
 Classification and functions and structure of muscles, Excitation contraction coupling, Mechanism 
of muscle contraction 
 Differences between skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle.  
 
 Applied physiology: Nerve injury, Myasthenia gravis, Neuromuscular junction blockers, Muscular 
dystrophy.  
 
3. Blood (Hematology)  
 Composition of blood, functions of cellular (RBC, WBC, and platelets) and non-cellular (plasma 
and plasma proteins) components of blood.  
 RBC (Erythrocyte): Erythropoiesis and factors affecting it, Normal count, and variations. 
Hemoglobin: Functions and recycling of hemoglobin, Jaundice, Anemia.  
 WBC: Classification, morphology, site of production, functions, normal and differential count, and 
variations. Immunity.  
 Platelets: Origin, normal count, and functions (role in hemostasis).   
 Hemostasis: Clotting factors and their role in hemostasis. Disorders of Hemostasis.  
 Blood groups: ABO & Rh systems, Erythroblastosis fetalis, Hazards of mismatched blood 
transfusion 
 Reticuloendothelial system 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      13 Hrs 
1. Nervous system (Central Nervous system) 
 Parts (gross connections) 
 Cerebral hemisphere: parts, corpus callosum, cerebral cortex, and functions of frontal, parietal, 
temporal, and occipital lobes of the cerebrum.  
 Connections between motor cortex and subcortical structures and spinal cord (descending tracts). 
Connections between spinal cord and thalamus- somatosensory cortex of parietal lobe 
(ascending tracts).  
 Upper and lower motor neurons  
 Descending and ascending tracts (origin, location, course, and termination)  
 Subcortical structures 
Basal ganglia, Thalamus, Hypothalamus, and Limbic system. Nuclei of subcortical structures, its 
connections with various parts of the brain and its functions.  
 Brain stem: (Midbrain, Pons, and Medulla oblongata)  
Nuclei, connections, and its functions 
 Cerebellum 
Physiological anatomy: lobes, cerebella cortex, connections (afferent and efferent), functions and 
applied aspects.   
 Reticular formation and its functions 
 Sleep   
 Spinal cord: parts of gray matter and constituents of white matter. Applied physiology. 
Peripheral Nervous System  
 Divisions and constituents of the peripheral nervous system 
 Functions of cranial and spinal nerves 
 Physiological anatomy of somatic nervous system and its functions  
 Physiological anatomy of autonomic nervous system (sympathetic and parasympathetic) and its 
functions    
2. Special senses  
 
 Vision –Functional anatomy of eye, visual pathway. Applied physiology: lesions along visual 
pathway and its effect. Refractive errors.  
 Hearing– Physiological anatomy of ear, Mechanism of hearing, and auditory pathway. Applied 
physiology: deafness.  
 Olfaction –receptors and pathway, function, and its applied physiology  
 Gustation-modalities, receptor, function, taste pathway, and its applied physiology  
 
UNIT- III                                                                                                                                     14 Hrs 
1. Cardiovascular system  
 Physiological anatomy of the heart, autonomic innervation, and its action on the heart, 
pulmonary and systemic circulation 
 Properties of cardiac muscle 
 Conducting system of the heart 
 Electrocardiogram 
 Cardiac cycle, Heart sounds.  
 Vascular system (branching), hemodynamics, factors influencing resistance to the blood flow.  
 Cardiac output: definition, factors regulating it and measurement of cardiac output.  
 Blood pressure: Definition, components, determinants of blood pressure and factors regulating it.  
 Lymphatic system and its functions  
 Pulse  
 Applied aspects of cardiovascular physiology: myocardial infarction, heart failure, shock, and 
others 
 Cardiovascular changes during exercise 
 
2. Respiratory System  
 Physiological anatomy of the respiratory tract, conducting and respiratory zone of the respiratory 
tract, pleural and pleural cavity, mechanics of respiration, changes in intrapleural and 
intrapulmonary pressures during respiratory cycle.  
 Compliance and factors affecting it (surface tension and surfactant), respiratory distress 
syndrome.  
 Lung volumes and capacities 
 Respiratory membrane, partial pressure of gases, transport of O2 and CO2, Oxyhemoglobin 
dissociation curve.  
 Regulation of respiration (Chemical and Neural)  
 Hypoxia, dyspnea, apnea, asphyxia, and cyanosis  
 Artificial respiration  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                       13 Hrs 
1.Digestive System  
 Introduction to Gastrointestinal system and Physiological anatomy of the wall of Gastrointestinal 
tract  
 Salivary glands and its function, mastication, pharynx, and Deglutition 
 Stomach: physiological anatomy, composition of Gastric juice (HCL secretion), its functions 
and its regulation.  
 Vomiting reflex.  
 
 Liver and gall bladder: Bile composition and its functions, and other functions of the liver, 
functions of the gall bladder. Enterohepatic circulation 
 Pancreas: Pancreatic juice composition, its functions and regulation of its release.  
 Small intestine: Succus entericus composition, functions, and regulation of its release. Small 
intestinal motility and its functions.  
 Large intestine: function, movements, and Defecation reflex  
 Digestion and absorption of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins.  
 
2.Renal System  
 Physiological anatomy & functions of the kidney, blood supply and special features of blood 
flow to the kidney. Structure and types of nephrons 
 Histology of the renal corpuscle: Juxtaglomerular apparatus.  
 Mechanisms of formation of urine: Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), Tubular reabsorption 
(Special emphasis on reabsorption of water, Na+, Glucose, HC03- and Ca2+) and tubular 
secretion (special emphasis on secretion of K+ and H+). Renal handling of urea, Renal 
threshold, and Tubular maximum.  
 GFR: Starling forces acting across the glomerular capillaries and factors affecting GFR 
 Concentration of urine: role of counter-current multiplier and counter-current exchanger  
 Role of kidney in Regulation of blood pressure and pH 
 Diuresis, diuretics, renal clearance. Renal function tests. 
 Artificial kidney (Dialysis) 
 Skin: Physiological anatomy of the skin and its role in temperature regulation.  
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                      10 Hrs 
1. Endocrine System  
 Physiological anatomy & functions of the kidney, blood supply and special features of blood 
flow to the kidney. Structure and types of nephrons 
 Histology of the renal corpuscle: Juxtaglomerular apparatus.  
 Mechanisms of formation of urine: Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), Tubular reabsorption 
(Special emphasis on reabsorption of water, Na+, Glucose, HC03- and Ca2+) and tubular 
secretion (special emphasis on secretion of K+ and H+). Renal handling of urea, Renal 
threshold, and Tubular maximum.  
 GFR: Starling forces acting across the glomerular capillaries and factors affecting GFR 
 Concentration of urine: role of counter-current multiplier and counter-current exchanger  
 Role of kidney in Regulation of blood pressure and pH 
 Diuresis, diuretics, renal clearance. Renal function tests. 
 Artificial kidney (Dialysis) 
 Skin: Physiological anatomy of the skin and its role in temperature regulation.  
2. Reproductive system  
 Introduction to reproductive system, sex differentiation, and Puberty.  
 Male reproductive system, physiological anatomy of the testis and its functions, functions of 
testosterone, Spermatogenesis, and its regulation.  
 Female reproductive system; physiological anatomy of ovaries and uterus.  
 Functions of ovaries; Oogenesis and ovarian cycle, functions of Estrogen and Progesterone, and 
menstrual cycle. 
 
 Physiological changes during pregnancy, pregnancy tests, parturition & lactation.  
 Male & Female contraceptive methods 
Course Outcome: 
 
At the end of the course, students should 
 
 Have thorough knowledge and appreciation of the concepts in Human physiology 
 understand the role of all organ systems in homeostasis  
 understand how the organ systems work in unison to bring out integrated physiological 
responses to challenges such as exercise, fasting and ascent to high altitude, and how they can 
sometimes fail 
 be able to perform, analyze and report on experiments and observations in physiology 
be able to apply their knowledge in their respective branches of Allied Health Sciences 
                                            
 
 
PRACTICALS                                             Total: 30 Hrs 
HEMATOLOGY  
 Microscope 
 Estimation of Hemoglobin  
 Estimation of bleeding time and clotting time  
 Measurement of ESR – demo 
 Estimation of PCV – demo 
 Perform RBC count of given blood sample.  
 Perform WBC count of given blood sample.  
 Perform a Differential Leucocyte Count.  
 Calculation of blood indices  
                                                                        CLINICALS  
A. Cardiovascular system  
 Examination of radial pulse  
 Measurement of blood pressure  
 Recording of ECG- demo  
 Measure of weight and height and calculate body mass index 
 Demonstrate JVP, apex beat, percussion of cardiac borders, auscultation of heart sounds.  
 
B. Respiratory system  
 Measurement of respiratory rate and temperature  
 Examination of respiratory system and temperature  
 Spirometry demo  
 
C. Nervous system  
 Examination of cranial nerves  
 Motor system examination  
 Examination of reflexes  
 
 Examination of the sensory system  
 
D. Special senses 
 Eye: Tests for vision (Acuity and colour perception)   
 Ear: Hearing tests 
 
Textbooks: 
 
1. HH Sudhakar D Venkatesh “Basics of Medial Physiology”, 5th edition, Wolters Kluwer,2023.  
2. K Sembulingam, Prema Sembulingam, “Essentials of Physiology for Paramedical Students” 
JAYPEE, 2021.  
Reference Books: 
 
1. John E Hall and Michael E. Hall, Guyton & Hall, “Textbook of Medical Physiology” 14th 
edition, 2020 
2. Eric P. Widmaier, Hershel Raff, and Kevin T. Strang “Vanders Human Physiology” 15TH edition, 
2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AHSJ1303                                       BIOCHEMISTRY    
                                                     L T   P C 
                                                                                                          3   1   2 5 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to the structure and function of essential biomolecules, which are the 
organic compounds that constitute the various components of living cells. The course covers the 
biochemical reactions that facilitate cellular growth, maintenance, reproduction, and energy utilization 
and storage. 
Course Objectives: 
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
 Understand the structure and functions of the cell membrane and organelles. 
 Comprehend the chemistry of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. 
 Explain enzyme actions, mechanisms, inhibition, and clinical enzymology. 
 Grasp the significance of nutrition, including vitamins and minerals. 
 Describe the structure and functions of immunoglobulins and hemoglobin. 
                                                                   THEORY                                           Total: 60 Hrs 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                           4 Hrs 
Cell and Membrane: Cell organelles and their functions, membrane structure, transport mechanisms 
across membranes, ionophores, membrane proteins, and transporters. 
 UNIT- II:                                                                                                                                      15 Hrs 
Chemistry of Biomolecules  
 Chemistry of Carbohydrates: Definition, classification, important monosaccharides, 
stereoisomers, anomers, mutarotation, and reactions of monosaccharides (tautomerization, 
reduction, dehydration, osazone formation). Important disaccharides and polysaccharides. 
  Chemistry of Lipids: Definition, classification, nature of fatty acids, triacylglycerol, 
saponification, iodine number, rancidity, antioxidants, complex lipids, steroids, and cholesterol 
functions. 
 Chemistry of Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins: Definition, classification, peptide bonds, 
biologically important peptides, essential and non-essential amino acids, protein structure 
(primary, secondary, tertiary, quaternary), precipitation, denaturation, coagulation, and color 
reactions of amino acids. 
 Chemistry of Nucleic Acids: Nitrogenous bases, nucleosides, nucleotides, DNA, genes, and 
types of RNA involved in protein synthesis. 
 
UNIT-III:                                                                                                                                        5 Hrs 
 Enzymes: Definition, classification, factors affecting enzyme activity, mechanism of action, 
coenzymes, proenzymes, isoenzymes, measurement units, competitive and non-competitive inhibitors, 
and clinical enzymology with normal values. 
UNIT- IV:                                                                                                                                        12 Hrs 
Nutrition and Vitamins  
 Nutrition: Calorific values of food, basal metabolic rate, specific dynamic action, energy 
requirements, nutritional importance of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, nitrogen balance, protein 
supplementation, Kwashiorkor, Marasmus, and Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA). 
  Vitamins: Overview of chemistry, sources, requirements, biochemical functions, deficiency 
symptoms of vitamins A, D, E, K, B-complex (thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, pantothenic acid, 
pyridoxine, biotin, folic acid, B-12), and Vitamin C. 
  Mineral Metabolism: Classification of macro and micro elements, including sodium, 
potassium, calcium, phosphorus, iron, iodine, magnesium, copper, zinc, fluoride, manganese, 
selenium, and molybdenum. 
UNIT -V:                                                                                                                                      4 Hrs 
Immunology and Hemoglobin  
 Immunology: Definitions of antigens and antibodies, structure and functions of antibodies. 
 Hemoglobin: Structure and functions of hemoglobin, its derivatives, degradation process, and 
jaundice. 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 Describe the structures and functions of cell membranes and organelles. 
 Understand and explain the chemistry and classifications of major biomolecules. 
 Classify enzymes and explain their mechanisms, inhibition types, and clinical relevance. 
 Comprehend the basics of nutrition, including sources, recommended dietary allowances (RDA), 
functions, and deficiency symptoms of vitamins and minerals. 
 Explain the structure and functions of immunoglobulins and hemoglobin. 
 
Textbooks: latest editions  
1. Concise Textbook of Biochemistry for Paramedical Students (2nd Edition, 2023) by DM Vasudevan 
2. A Textbook on Biochemistry for Paramedical Students (2022) by Dr. Kiran Dahiya 
 Reference Book: 
1. Textbook of Biochemistry for Medical Students (10th Edition, 2023) by DM Vasudevan 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1101                        COMMUNICATIVE ENGLISH                                                      L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                         3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The creation of the Course is to facilitate Stakeholders in productively using the Language to functional 
advantage to form meaningful engagements in a social context and influence their professional dynamic. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To expand and enhance vocabulary systematically for clear communication, richer expression, and 
deeper comprehension across various contexts." 
2. To provide the grammatical knowledge and skills necessary to communicate effectively in 
English, both orally and in writing. 
3. To strengthen their ability to write academic papers, essays and summaries using the “Mind 
Mapping,’ dynamic. 
4. To enhance communication skills by analyse, evaluate, and express their opinions on various 
topics, fostering the development of critical thinking abilities 
5. To develop proficiency in listening, speaking, reading and writing, enabling individuals to 
communicate effectively in various real-life situations. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Vocabulary and Reading: Special Features of English Vocabulary, Reading With Purpose; 
Understanding What is Read; Drawing a Conclusion Based on Inferences, Deduction, Reading Between 
the Lines, Context, Connotation, Higher Order Thinking; How to Explain Specific Information with 
Clarity; Defining and Giving Reasons; Giving Directions; Professional Vocabulary.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                         9 Hrs 
Basic Grammar: Subject-Verb Agreement; Verb Tenses; Active-Passive Voice; Direct and Indirect 
Speech; Question Tags; Degrees of Comparison; Articles; Avoiding Jargon. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Writing: Letter Writing; Report Writing; E-Communication, Drafting and Collating Key Information, 
Taking Notes from Lectures, Reading Materials, Reporting on Minutes of the Meeting, Precis Writing 
  
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
 
Basics of Communication: Role of Communication; Purpose of Communication; Barriers to 
Communication; Verbal and Non-Verbal Communication, Communication at the Workplace; Human 
Needs and Communication; “Mind Mapping” Communication; E-Communication. 
  
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                         9 Hrs 
Presentations: Self-Introduction; Individual Presentation; Group Discussions; Debates. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to: 
1. To review grammatical structures of English and the use of these forms in specific communicative 
contexts, which include: class activities, homework assignments, reading of texts and writing and 
functional real-world facets. 
2. To improve their accuracy and fluency in producing and understanding spoken and written 
English and endorse this proficiency in both personal and professional realms. 
3. To attain and enhance competence in the four modes of literacy: Writing, Speaking, Reading and 
Listening. 
4. To develop their ability as critical thinkers. 
5. To empower the individuals to connect, engage, and thrive in diverse personal and professional 
environments. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Meenakshi Raman and Sangeeta Sharma, “Technical Communication: Principles and Practice”, 
3rd Edition, Oxford University Press, 2015. 
2. M. Ashraf Rizvi, “Effective Technical Communication”, Second Edition, McGraw. Hill 
Education, 2017. 
3. Wilfred Funk and Norman Lewis, “30 Days to a More Powerful Vocabulary”, Latest Edition, 
Pocket Books, 2021. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Grant Taylor, “English Conversation Practice”, Tata McGraw-Hill Education India, 2016. 
2. Gary Blake and Robert W. Bly, “The Elements of Technical Writing”, 2nd Edition, 2000, 
Longman. 
3. Raymond Murphy, “English Grammar in Use”, Fourth Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
2019. 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201A                                BASICS OF PHYSIOTHERAPY                          L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                   3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to aim at imparting a basic level health program. This program is formulated to 
enable student to gain adequate knowledge, skills and leading to an ability to identify the basics of early 
features of the health issues 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. Gather and interpret information within a holistic framework pertaining to health. 
2. The overall content of the curriculum focuses on health care and clinical education experiences for 
each student 
3. Understand the basic fundamentals of physiotherapy 
4. Familiarizes participants with different procedures and techniques used in physiotherapy and their 
practical application across various conditions 
5. Provide participants with a substantial understanding of physiotherapy and promote safe practices 
and ethical behaviour in physiotherapy practice. 
 
UNIT-I Basics of Physiotherapy                                                                                           5 Hrs 
i. What is Physiotherapy? 
ii. Types of Physiotherapy 
iii. Benefits of Physiotherapy 
iv. Why is Physiotherapy done? 
UNIT-II Women’s Health                                                                                                      5 Hrs 
i. Pre natal exercises & Care 
ii. Post Natal exercises  
 
UNIT-III Acute injuries & management and the uses of Orthotics & Prosthetics          10 Hrs 
i .Mechanism of injury 
ii. Acute muscle injuries 
     -Muscle strain 
     -Risks of muscle strain 
 
     -Muscle imbalance:  
     -Muscle inflexibility: 
iii.   Ligament sprain and difference between sprain and strain 
iv. Orthotics & Prosthetics                                            
UNIT-IV Ergonomics  & Health and  Aerobics                                                                  13 Hrs 
i. work-related musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs). 
ii. Risk factors associated with work-related MSDs & Possible Causes 
iii. Common ergonomic symptoms  
iv. Different types of Ergonomics & principles of ergonomics and v. Ergonomic Control  Methods 
v. Awkward body postures – hazards 
vi. Physical Activity and exercise  
vii. Physical Fitness and Maximum Oxygen Consumption 
viii. Aerobic Exercise Training and Physiological Response to Aerobic Exercise 
ix. Cardiovascular Response to Exercise and Respiratory Response to Exercise  
x. Responses Providing Additional Oxygen to Muscle and Exercise Program  
xi. Warm-Up Period, Aerobic Exercise Period and Cool-Down Period Application 
 
UNIT-V Education & Awareness about common diseases and BLS                              12 Hrs 
i. Bell’s palsy 
ii. Diabetes 
iii. Coronary artery heart disease 
iv. OA Knee 
v. Stroke 
vi. LBA  
vii. Early identification of congenital anomalies  
viii. BLS Theory 
ix. BLS Practical’s 
 
Course Outcomes:  
1. Gain the basic knowledge of Physiotherapy 
2. Familiarize the procedures and techniques used in physiotherapy 
3. Protect   and manage from the sport injuries  
4. Gain Knowledge about Ergonomics  
5. To maintain physical fitness 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Physiotherapy In Obstetrics And Gynecology-Polden And Mantle,Jaypee Brothers 
2. Women’s Health- Ruth Sapsford, Lippincott,1998 
3. Textbook of orthopedics medicine Vol I & II by James Cyriax – Bailliere 
4. Susan B O'Sullivan, Physical Rehabilitation 6th Edition, 6 edition F A Davis; 2013. ISBN
13: 978-0803625792 
5. Arias” Practical Guide To High Risk Pregnancy And Delivery By Amarnath Bhide,Sabaratnam 
Arulkumaran 
 
Reference Books: 
1. John Ebenezer- Essentials of Orthopedics for Physiotherapists- 3rd  edition 2016 
2. Davidson’s principles and practice of  medicine 
3. Fundamentals of Ergonomics in Theory and Practice- Alan Hedge- 2019 
4. Introduction to Ergonomics, Third Edition" -Robert Bridger- 2018 
5. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Practice: Improving System Performance and Human Well
Being"- Steven Shorrock, Claire Williams- 2020 
6. Acute Care Handbook for Physical Therapists- Jaime C. Paz, Michele P. West- 2019 
7. Sports Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation: Integrating Medicine and Science for Performance 
Solutions" David Joyce, Daniel Lewindon- 2015 
8. Orthotic Intervention for the Hand and Upper Extremity: Splinting Principles and Process"- 
Marylyn A. Jacobs, Noelle M. Austin- 2013 
9. Prosthetics and Orthotics: Lower Limb and Spine"- Joan E. Edelstein, Alex Moroz- 2017 
10. "Essentials of Physiotherapy”- Prakash Narain Tandon- 2016 
11. Pathology for the Physical Therapist Assistant - Catherine C. Goodman, Kenda S. Fuller- 2020 
(3rd Edition) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201B                                                 BIOSTATISTICS              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                               3 0 0  3 
Course Description: 
Biostatistics is the application of statistical methods to biological and health-related fields. This course 
provides a comprehensive introduction to the principles and techniques of biostatistics essential for 
conducting research in medicine, public health, and biology. Students will learn how to effectively 
collect, analyze, and interpret data from biological and health sciences, with a focus on understanding 
and addressing key issues such as experimental design, sampling methods, data visualization, hypothesis 
testing, and regression analysis. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Gain a solid understanding of biostatistical principles including descriptive statistics, probability, 
hypothesis testing, and regression analysis. 
2. Apply these principles to analyze data from biological and health sciences, focusing on 
experimental and observational studies. 
3. Critically interpret statistical results and effectively communicate findings to different audiences. 
4. Develop proficiency in using statistical software for data manipulation, analysis, and visualization. 
5. Design studies, evaluate literature, and collaborate in interdisciplinary teams, preparing for 
advanced study and research in biostatistics and related fields. 
 
UNIT-I Descriptive methods                   9 Hrs 
Frequency Distribution, Characteristics of a Frequency Distribution, Tabular and Graphical Presentation 
of Data: Line Graphs, Bar Charts, Histograms, Ogives. 
UNIT-II Measures of central tendency                    9 Hrs 
Arithmetic Mean, Median, Mode, Position of Averages, Selection of the Appropriate Measure of Central 
Tendency, Geometric Mean, Harmonic Mean. 
UNIT-III Measures of dispersion                               9 Hrs 
Range, Interquartile Range, Mean Deviation, Variance and Standard Deviation 
UNIT-IV Sampling Designs                  9 Hrs 
Sampling and Sample Designs, Significance of Probability and Non-probability sampling methods, 
Crossover Design, Case Control Design, Cohort Study Design, Designing clinical trials ‐ Single‐ and 
Double‐Blind Experiments. 
UNIT-V Data analysis and interpretation                   9 Hrs 
 
Tests of hypothesis, Tests of significance, chi‐square test, Goodness of fit, Analysis of variance. 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Ability to design experiments, sampling variables, analyze the biological data, interpret and 
present the results in meaningful way. 
2. Create tables and graphs for data presentation 
3. Describe measures of central tendency and dispersion along with calculating probability features 
of experiments. 
4. Discuss the correlation between various types of data along with associated variables. 
5. Test hypothesis and carry out related statistical tests 
 
Text Books: 
1. Daniel WW, Cross CL (2013) Biostatistics: A Foundation Sciences 
2. Biostatistics: A Foundation for Analysis in the Health Sciences, 11th Edition Chad L. Cross, 
Wayne W. Daniel , ISBN: 978-1-119-49657-1, December 2018 
 
Reference Books 
1. Forthofer RN, Lee ES, Hernandez M (2006) To Design, Analysis, and Discovery. Elsevier Ltd., 
Amsterdam. 
2. Principles of Biostatistics, 3rd Edition, By Marcello Pagano, Kimberlee Gauvreau, Heather 
Mattie (2022). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201C                                       CONSTITUTION OF INDIA                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                                               3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Constitution of India course provides a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental principles, 
structure, and functioning of the Indian Constitution. This course examines the historical evolution, key 
features, and various interpretations of the Constitution, highlighting its significance in shaping India's 
legal and political landscape. Through this course, students will gain insights into the roles and 
responsibilities of different branches of government, fundamental rights and duties of citizens, and the 
constitutional mechanisms that ensure the democratic functioning of the nation. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1 To realize the significance of constitution of India to students from all walks of life and help 
them to understand the basic concepts of Indian constitution. 
2 To identify the importance of fundamental rights as well as fundamental duties. 
3 To understand the functioning of Union, State and Local Governments in Indian federal system. 
4 To learn procedure and effects of emergency, composition and activities of election commission 
and amendment procedure. 
5 To acquire knowledge to appear for competitive examinations. 
 
UNIT-I                                              9 Hrs 
Historical Background – Constituent Assembly of India – Philosophical Foundations of The Indian 
Constitution – Preamble – Constitutional amendments 
 
UNIT-II                                                       9 Hrs  
Fundamental Rights – Directive Principles of State Policy – Fundamental Duties – Citizenship – 
Constitutional Remedies for Citizens;  
 
UNIT-III                                    9 Hrs 
Union Government – Structures of the Union Government and Functions – President – Vice President – 
Prime Minister – Cabinet – Parliament – Supreme Court of India – Judicial Review. 
 
UNIT-IV                                    9 Hrs 
 
State Government – Structure and Functions – Governor – Chief Minister – Cabinet – State Legislature – Judicial System in States – High Courts and other Subordinate Courts. 
 
UNIT-V                                               9 Hrs 
Statutory Institutions -Elections-Election Commission of India, National Human Rights Commission, 
National Commission for Women; Local Self Government; Lok pal. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course the student should be able to: 
1. Understand and explain the significance of Indian Constitution as the fundamental law of the land. 
2. Exercise his fundamental rights in proper sense at the same time identifies his responsibilities in 
national building. 
3. Analyze the Indian political system, the powers and functions of the Union, State and Local 
Governments in detail 
4. Understand Electoral Process, Emergency provisions and Amendment procedure. 
5. Take part in competitive examinations with confidence. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Durga Das Basu, “Introduction to the Constitution of India “, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi. 
2. R.C.Agarwal, (1997) “Indian Political System”, S.Chand and Company, New Delhi. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Sharma, Brij Kishore, “Introduction to the Constitution of India”, Prentice Hall of India, New 
Delhi. 
2. The Constitution of India (2022) : 
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s380537a945c7aaa788ccfcdf1b99b5d8f/uploads/2023/05/20230501
95.pdf  
3. Refer the website through the link given for Constitution of India in various Indian Languages 
https://legislative.gov.in/constitution-of-india/  
4. Indian Constitution at Work by National Council of Educational Research and Training, Sri 
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201D                                   ETHICAL HACKING                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course is about to learn ethical hacking and security challenges in computer networking. Which 
addresses the data security issues and types of attacks includes malwares, viruses, sniffer and denial of 
service. It teaches ethical responsibilities, professional integrity and making appropriate use of the tools 
and techniques. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. Know the concepts of hacking, ports and penetration testing 
2. Understand the footprinting types and techniques of scanning 
3. Understand the process of system hacking, trojans and backdoors 
4. Apply the concepts of sniffing, packet analysis & session Hijacking 
5. Learn the ethical issues and responsibilities associated with ethical hacking 
 
UNIT-I              9 Hrs 
Introduction to Hacking: Hacking, Types and phases of hacking. Introduction to Ports & Protocols: 
Ports, Protocols, Primary Network Types. Introduction to Penetration Testing: Penetration test, 
Categories and Types of Penetration tests, Structure of Penetration Test Report. 
 
UNIT-II             9 Hrs 
Footprinting: Footprinting, Types, Using ping and ns Lookup commands in Windows command line. 
Scanning: Scanning, Basics of Scanning, Basic Techniques of Scanning, Enumerating DNS using dns 
enum, Performing flag scan using hping3. 
UNIT-III                           10 Hrs 
Issues Hacking into System: System Hacking, Password Cracking, Default password databases, 
Manual and Automated Password Cracking, Process of System Hacking, Using Keyloggers. Trojans & 
Backdoors: Trojans, Working of Trojan, Infection Techniques, Attack, Lifecycle and Classification of 
Virus, Worms, Virus Construction Kit. 
UNIT-IV             9 Hrs 
Types, Sniffing, Packet Analysis & Session Hijacking: Sniffing, Packet Analysis, Types of Sniffing, 
Active and Passive Sniffing Techniques, Session Hijacking. Cryptography: Cryptography, Digital 
 
Signature, Hash Functions. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                           8 Hrs 
An introduction to the particular legal, professional and ethical issues likely to face the domain of 
ethical hacking. Ethical responsibilities, professional integrity and making appropriate use of the tools 
and techniques associated with ethical hacking. 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to 
1. Explain the concepts related to hacking, ports and protocols, penetration testing 
2. Determine the applicable footprinting techniques and scanning methods 
3. Explain the process of system hacking and explain the concepts Trojans, backdoors, worms and 
virus and it’s countermeasures 
4. Demonstrate systematic understanding of the concepts of sniffing and cryptography 
5. Understand the legal and professional responsibilities of ethical hacking 
 
Text Books: 
1. Jiawei Hacking: Be a Hacker with Ethics, Harsh Bothra, Khanna Publications, 2019. 
2. Ethical Hacking and Penetration Testing Guide, Rafay Baloch, 2014. 
 
Reference Books: 
3. Alex Berson Kali Linux Wireless Penetration Testing Beginner's Guide, Vivek Ramachandran, 
Cameron Buchanan, Packt Publishing, 2015. 
4. SQL Injection Attacks and Defense, 1st Edition, Justin Clarke-Salt, Syngress Publication. 
5. Mastering Modern Web Penetration Testing, Prakhar Prasad, Packt Publishing, October 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201E                       FUNDAMENTALS OF COMPUTERS                       L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to aim at imparting a basic level appreciation program. The incumbent can use 
the computer for basic purposes of preparing his personnel/business letters, viewing information on the 
Internet (the web), sending mail, using internet banking services, etc. and allows to become digitally 
literate. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students to: 
1. To introduce the fundamental concepts of computers, including their characteristics, types, and 
applications. 
2. To explain the functional components of a computer and various input/output devices. 
3. To understand different types of computer memory and storage devices. 
4. To introduce computer languages and software, including algorithms and programming languages 
and provide an overview of operating systems and basic networking concepts. 
5. To introduce the components and practical applications of MS Office. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Introduction to Computer: Computer Characteristics, Concept of Hardware, Software, Evolution of 
computer and Generations, Types of Computers–Analog and Digital computers, Hybrid Computers, 
General Purpose and Special Purpose Computers, Limitations of Applications of Computer in Various 
Fields. 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs                                                                         
Structure and Working of Computer: Functional Block Diagram of Computer. CPU, ALU, Memory 
UNIT-, Bus Structure of Digital Computer–Address, Data and Control Bus. 
Input/Output Devices: Input Device– Keyboard, Mouse, Scanner, MICR,OMR. Output Devices
VDU, Printers– Dot Matrix, Daisy-wheel, Inkjet, Laser, Line Printers and Plotters. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Computer Memory: Memory Concept, Memory Cell, Memory Organization, Semiconductor Memory 
 – RAM, ROM, PROM, EPROM, Secondary Storage Devices – Magnetic Tape, Magnetic Disk (Floppy 
Disk and Hard Disk.), Compact Disk. 
Computer Language and Software: Algorithm, Flowcharts, Machine Language, Assembly Language, 
High Level Language, Assembler, Compiler, Interpreter. Characteristics of Good Language. Software – 
System and Application Software. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Operating System: Operating System, Evolution of Operating System. Functions of Operating System. 
Types of Operating Systems. Detailed Study of Windows Operating System. Introduction and Features 
of LINUXOS. 
Networking: Concept, Basic Elements of a Communication System, Data Transmission 
Media,Topologies, LAN, MAN, WAN, Internet 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
MSOffice: Introduction to MS Office, Components and Features. MSWord: Creating Letter, Table, 
Fonts, Page Layout Document, Formatting, Spell Check, Print Preview, Template, Color, Mail Merge, 
AutoText, Inserting Picture, WordArt. 
MS Excel: Introduction to Excel, Sorting, Queries, Graphs, Scientific Functions. 
PowerPoint: Introduction to PowerPoint, Creation of Slides, Inserting Pictures, Preparing Slide Show 
with Animation. MS Access: Creation and Manipulation of Files. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, student will be able to:  
1. Understand the basic characteristics, types, and applications of computers. 
2. Comprehend the functional components and input/output devices of a computer. 
3. Describe various memory types and secondary storage devices. 
4. Differentiate between machine, assembly, and high-level languages and their associated tools. 
Understand the role and types of operating systems, with knowledge of Windows and Linux, and 
basic networking concepts. 
5. Utilize MS Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Access for practical applications. 
Text Books: 
1. Peter Norton: Computing Fundamentals.6th Edition, Mc Graw Hill-Osborne, 2007. 
2. Sarita Dhawale, Thakur Akash Ashok: Fundamentals of Computer, Thakur Publication Pvt. Ltd. 
Reference Books: 
1. Deborah Morley and Charles S.Parker; Fundamentals of Computers; Cengage Learning, India 
edition; 2009. 
 
2. Alex is Leon and Mathews Leon; Fundamentals of Information Technology; Vikas Publication, 
Chennai. 
3. Francis Scheid; Theory and Problems of Introduction to Computer Science Schaum’s Outline 
Series; Tata Mc Graw Hill publication. 
TAUT1201F                        GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is important for professionals from the point of creating engendered perspectives and 
sensitivity toward issues concerning women, men, and sexual minorities. It further reaffirms the belief 
in the importance of grassroots experiences and narratives while dealing with gender issues. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand key concepts, and issues in gender and development  
2. Understand the social construction of gender and develop gender perspectives in analyzing social 
realities 
3. Understand how the gender dynamics of power and inequality play out in the social institutions 
of households, markets, and states and within the arena of civil society.  
4. Create awareness about the magnitude of gender disparities in the present context  
5. Examine through the gender lens, the interlinkage between cultural practices social processes, 
and development approaches  
 
UNIT-I Basic Concepts and Theories of Feminism                                                             10 Hrs 
Concepts- gender, gender studies, gender identity, gender role stereotyping, gender division of labor, 
gender discrimination, gender equality, and equity.  Overview of feminist theories – Liberal feminism, 
Radical Feminism, Black feminism, postmodern feminism, Eco‐ feminism; The international 
background to the Women’s Movement, The genesis of the Women’s Movement in India. 
Contemporary Contestations – Intersex and Transgender Movements.  Feminist thinkers in the 18th, 
19th, 20th, and 21st Centuries.  
 
UNIT-II Gender Issues                                                                                                         10 Hrs 
Major gender issues – national and global - causes and consequences., LGBTQIA+ issues (Gender 
violence in private and public spaces: Domestic violence, Dowry, trafficking in women and children, 
rape, sex-selective abortion, female infanticide, female foeticide, child marriage, prostitution • Gender, 
leadership, and workplace; Sexual Harassment at Workplace). Gender-based violence, patriarchy, 
sexism, racism, casteism, economic inequality, and misogyny. Gender and health (Physical and mental), 
reproductive health, and sexuality. Feminization of poverty. Issues of the rights of sexual minorities and 
 
transgender - Article 377 and beyond. 
 
UNIT-III Gender Perspectives in Development                                                                   10 Hrs 
Gender Analysis Tools: Gender budgeting, Gender mainstreaming, SIG, Gender Parity Index, Gender 
Inequality Index, Human Development Index, Gender Development Index, Gender Empowerment 
Measure, Approaches to development-- Women in Development (WID), Women and Development 
(WAD), Gender and Development(GAD), Millennium Development Goals, and Sustainable 
Development Gender Analysis Frameworks; Gender blind; neutral and redistributive policies; Welfare, 
Efficiency and Empowerment approaches to Gender; Strategic and practical gender needs/interests; 
Case Studies to understand the engagement with gender, (Poverty alleviation Forestry; Drinking Water 
and Sanitation; Health programmes, Urban renewal and slum rehabilitation Programmes, and micro
credit programmes like SHGs. 
 
 
UNIT-IV Mechanisms Addressing Issues and Best Practices                                             10 Hrs 
Constitutional and legislative safeguards, policies, and programmes ,Institutional mechanisms: National 
Commission for Women, Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, Crime Against Women Cell, Family Court, Family 
Counselling Centers and Crisis intervention centers Best practices to address disparity, violence, and 
safety issues 
International initiatives world conferences, women’s decade, CEDAW. Indian initiatives – Towards 
Equality Report, National Perspective Plan for women, National Policy for the Empowerment of 
Women-2001, National and State women’s Commissions, Nirbhaya, Women Development Corporation; 
Legal remedies and Social Welfare Services available to Women Facing Violence. 
 
UNIT-V Gender and Media                                                                                                     5 Hrs 
Discourse on Women and Media Studies- Mainstream Media, Feminist Media.Coverage of Women’s 
issues, sexual minorities, and issues of women in Mass Media and Media Organizations (Audio-Visual 
and Print media).Digital Media and legal protection (cybercrimes and laws). Alternative Media – Folk 
Art, Street Play and Theatre. Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, Pornography, 
Impact of media on Gender. Construction of masculinity and feminity in media.   
 
Course Outcomes:  
By the end of the course, students should be able to:  
1. Understand the concept of gender and the social construction of feminity and masculinity  
2. Develop sensitivity towards the existing practices leading to gender discrimination and 
marginalization in society.  
 
3. Develop the ability to identify social, economic and political systems that adversely affect the 
well-being and functioning of women. 
4. Suggest affirmative action in planning to promote gender equity, equality, and safety for women 
and sexual minorities  
5. Understand the major theoretical and empirical issues that emerge in the gender field. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Nalini Visvanathan (Ed.), (2006) The Women, Gender and Development Reader, Zubaan, New 
 Delhi 
2. Kannabiran, Kalpana& Ritu Menon. 2007. From Mathura to Manorma: Resisting Violence 
Against Women, New Delhi: Women Unlimited 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Seth, M. 2001. Women and Development: The Indian Experience. New Delhi: Sage 
Publications. 
2. Banerjee, N; S. Sen &N. Dhawan. 2011. Mapping the Field: Gender Relations in Contemporary 
India, Volume 1, Kolkata: Stree  
3. Bose, C.E. &Minjeong Kim. 2009. Global Gender Research: Transnational Perspectives, New 
York: Routledge 
Notes 
 
1. https://www.studocu.com/row/document/kohat-university-of-science-and-technology/gender
studies/gender-studies-new-lecture-notes-1-7/5176872 
2. https://teentalk.ca/learn-about/gender
identity/#:~:text=There%20are%20many%20different%20gender,or%20a%20combination%20o
f%20these. 
3. https://genderspectrum.org/articles/understanding-gender 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201G                          LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                               3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive introduction to the fundamental concepts of leadership. Students 
will gain knowledge of different leadership levels and styles, and understand the significance of vision 
and strategy formulation. 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the basic concepts of leadership 
2.   Knowledge of leadership development strategy 
3.   Knowledge of leadership development approaches 
4. Knowledge of leadership traits 
5. Awareness on self-awareness exercises.  
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs                                                         
Understanding Leadership-Defining Leadership; Leadership styles, Entrepreneurial leaders, Different 
levels of leaders 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Strategy formulation- formulation of vision, Strategy formulation and communication, role of the 
leader in managing change, foundation for effective team development 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Leadership development approaches- Significance of leadership development strategy, leadership 
development approaches- One-to-one coaching, Mentor schemes, Role of HR and development, Buddy 
pairs, Action learning sets, Work-based projects  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Recognizing Leadership Traits-Historical Leaders; Traits Leaders Display, Leadership Studies: What 
Traits Do Effective Leaders Exhibit. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Recognising self - Exercises of Self-awareness using Johari Window, Development diaries, Feedback 
exercises, Personal vision setting 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Understand the basic concepts of leadership 
2. Understand the significance of vision and strategy formulation 
3. Knowledge of leadership development approaches.  
4. Knowledge of leadership traits. 
5. Knowledge of self awareness techniques 
 
Text Books:  
1. Rosemary Ryan, Leadership Development - A guide for HR and Training professionals, 
ELSEVIER, UK  
2. Kim S. Cameron, Positive Leadership: Strategies for Extraordinary Performance, 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Manuel London, Leadership Development: Paths To Self-insight and Professional Growth, 
Psychology Press, New York. 
2. Susan E. Murphy, Ronald E. Riggio, The Future of Leadership Development, Routledge is an 
imprint of Taylor & Franci 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201H                              MATHEMATICAL THINKING                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                               3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
Mathematical Thinking is a university elective course that teaches fundamental concepts of basic 
algebraic and mathematical operations. After learning this course, students will easily be able to learn 
more problems solving skills and use this course for practicing. The course emphasizes problem-solving 
skills and analytical thinking, and equips students with the skills necessary to tackle real-world problems 
using basic mathematical and arithmetical concepts. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, the students will be able: 
1. To familiarize the students with the fundamental concepts of basic numbers, mathematical 
operations, and divisibility rules 
2. Summarize the basic concepts mathematical operations on numbers and calculate LCM, GCD to 
solve simple problems. 
3. Compute To probability concepts and statistical methods in various applications engineering. 
4. Understand the formula for evaluate the square root and cube root of different types numbers  
5. Impart the arrangements and selections of things and counting numbers and check for 
independence of events. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Number system and Tests of Divisibility: Digits, numbers, Indian-Hindu-Arabic system, Roman 
Numbers, Face Value and Place values, Various Types of Numbers or Standard Numbers, Prime 
number, composite numbers, Perfect Numbers, Co-primes (or) Relative Primes, Twin primes, perfect 
numbers, Testing of prime numbers, Mathematical operations on even and odd numbers. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
LCM and GCD or HCF: Factors and Multiplers, Highest Common Factor (H.C.F.) or Greatest 
Common Measure (G.C.M.) or Greatest Common Divisor (G.C.D.) factorization method, division 
method, finding the H.C.F. of more than two numbers, factorization method of finding L.C.M, H.C.F. 
and L.C.M. of fractions. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
 
System Simplifications: BODMAS’ Rule, Modulus of a Real Number, Virnaculum (or Bar), Algebraic 
identities, set theory operations (union, intersection, complements). 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs   
Square Roots, Cube Roots, averages and percentages: Square Root, cube root, Problems on numbers, 
concept of averages, problems on averages, concept of percentage and problems on percentages. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Permutations, combinations and Probability:  Fundamental principle with respect of addition and 
multiplication, permutations, combination, relation between permutation and combination, Random 
experiment, sample space and basic problems of events of a probability. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to: 
1. To explain fundamental concepts of basic number system, including standard numbers, 
mathematical operations, and divisibility rules. 
2. To apply mathematical operations on numbers and calculate lcm, gcd to solve simple problems. 
3. To evaluate the arrangements and selections of things and counting numbers. 
4. To understand the simplications by using identities and apply the different kinds of operations on 
the numbers. 
5. To evaluate square root and cube root of different types numbers and calculate appropriate 
solutions for different problems. 
Text Books: 
1. Quantitative Aptitude  Text Book, Dr.RS.Agrrwal. 
2. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book,S.Chandu. 
3. Andhra Pradesh Academy of IPE text books. 
Reference Books: 
1. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book, Quicker Mathematics ,second edition 
2. Quantitative Aptitude, Text Book,Abjuirh guwaha,Fourth edition 
3. www.online quantitative aptitude testseries.com 
4. Quantitative Aptitude, GSR Publications,Gunturu,third edition 
5. Quantitative Aptitude, verbal reasoning ,Guptha publication,3rd edition 
6. www.enaduprathibaonline.com  and www.sakshionlineseries.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201I                                                 NURSING                L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This module is designed to help the students to acquire comprehensive knowledge in basic concepts of 
Health, Nursing, Vital signs, Basic Life support, home care management of Diabetes & Hypertension 
and Adolescent health.  
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand the concept of health, illness, and Nursing 
2. Learn the technique of assessing and monitoring vital signs  
3. Perform BLS using evidence based national or international guidelines in the management of adult 
victims with the cardiac arrest. 
4. Understand the concept of home care management of Diabetes and Hypertensive persons  
5. Develop understanding about the normal growth and development, needs and health issues of 
adolescents  
 
UNIT-I               03 Hrs 
Concepts of Health and Nursing: Definition of Health and ill ness, Health-illness continuum, Factors 
influencing Health, Nursing as a profession and Career ladder. 
UNIT-II           12 Hrs 
Vital signs: Temperature: Physiology, regulation, factors affecting body temperature, Assessment of 
body temperature: sites, technique and special considerations.  
Pulse: Physiology & regulation, characteristics of the pulse, factors affecting pulse, Assessment of the 
pulse: sites, location, technique and special considerations.  
Respiration: Physiology and regulation, mechanics of breathing, characteristics of the respiration, 
factors affecting respiration, Assessment of respiration: technique and special considerations.  
Blood pressure: Physiology and regulation, characteristics of the blood pressure, factors affecting 
blood pressure. Assessment of blood pressure: sites, equipment and technique and special 
considerations. Recording of vital signs. 
Pain: Definition, types physiology of pain and factors influencing the pain 
 
UNIT-III             8 Hrs 
 
Basic life support / basic cardiopulmonary life support (BLS/BCLS) 
Introduction, definition, purposes, indications, contraindications and steps in procedure. 
UNIT-IV           12 Hrs 
Home care management of Diabetes and Hypertension  
Diabetes- Introduction to Diabetes Mellitus –   A National and Global burden: Classification, risk 
factors, pathophysiology, manifestations, screening, diagnostic criteria and complications, The treatment 
Modalities of Diabetes Mellitus: (Life style modifications 
Diet therapy, Exercise, Medical Management, Self-Management, Practical Aspects: Blood Glucose 
monitoring, Diabetic foot care, Exercises, Diabetic Diet Planning, Self-Insulin administration) 
Hypertension- Introduction to Hypertension, Types, risk factors , pathophysiology ,manifestations, 
diagnostic criteria and complications, treatment modalities  : life style modifications, Diet therapy 
,Exercise ,Medical management.  
 
UNIT-V           10 Hrs 
Adolescent Health: Growth and Development of adolescent, Nutritional and developmental needs of 
adolescent, Common health problems including mental health problems, Reproductive and sexual health 
issues 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Acquire a thorough knowledge on concept of health and illness. 
2. Demonstrate skills in monitoring the vital signs 
3. Develop skills in performing BLS/BCLS 
4. Able to attain knowledge and skills on treatment modalities of DM 
5. Aware of normal Growth and development and common health problems in adolescent  
Text Books: 
1. Potter and perrys, Fundamentals of Nursing,4th edition, Mosby, Elsevier publication  
2. Lewis, textbook of Medical Surgical Nursing 4th south  Asian edition, Elsevier publication 
3. Dorothy R. Marlow, Text book of paediatric nursing, sixth edition, Elsevier publications, 
Reference Books: 
1. Joyce M black textbook of medical surgical nursing ,8th edition, Elsevier publications, 
2. Kozier and Erbs, textbook of fundamentals of Nursing, Elsevier publications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201J                                       ONE HEALTH                  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                               3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This course introduces students to the One Health approach, an interdisciplinary approach that 
recognizes the interconnectedness of human, animal and environmental health. Students will learn about 
the history of One Health, its relevance to global health and its role in addressing a range of health 
challenges, including zoonotic diseases, environmental health hazards and antimicrobial resistance. The 
course will also explore current and emerging One Health challenges and innovations and the ethical 
considerations of One Health research and practice. 
Course Objectives:  
1. To explain the relevance of One Health to global health. 
2. To understand the interdisciplinary nature of One Health research and practice. 
3. To analyze the impact of environmental health hazards on human and animal health. 
4. To identify emerging One Health challenges and innovations. 
5. To evaluate ethical considerations in One Health research and practice. 
UNIT-I                                       9 Hrs 
Overview of One Health and its relevance to global health, Definition of One Health and its history, 
Examples of One Health challenges, such as zoonotic diseases and antimicrobial resistance, The role of 
inter-disciplinarity in One Health research and practice, Global One Health initiatives and their impact 
UNIT-II                                                    9 Hrs 
Environmental health and its relationship to One Health, Overview of environmental health and its 
impact on human and animal health, Environmental risks to health, such as pollution and climate 
change, Case studies highlighting the impact of environmental hazards on human and animal health, 
The role of One Health in addressing environmental health challenges 
UNIT-III                         9 Hrs 
Zoonotic diseases and One Health, Overview of zoonotic diseases and their impact on human and 
animal health, The ecology of zoonotic diseases and how they emerge and spread, Case studies of major 
zoonotic disease outbreaks, such as Ebola and COVID-19, The One Health approach to preventing and 
controlling zoonotic diseases. 
UNIT-IV                         9 Hrs 
Antimicrobial resistance and One Health, Overview of antimicrobial resistance and its impact on human 
and animal health, the relationship between antimicrobial use in animal agriculture and human health, 
the role of One Health in addressing the global challenge of antimicrobial resistance, Case studies of 
One Health approaches to controlling antimicrobial resistance, such as the WHO Global Action Plan 
UNIT-V                         9 Hrs 
 
Future directions in One Health research and practice, Emerging One Health challenges-food security 
and emerging infectious diseases, Innovations in One Health research and practice, such as digital 
technologies and genomics, Opportunities for One Health collaboration across sectors and disciplines, 
Ethical considerations in One Health research and practice.  
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Describe the One Health approach and its relevance to global health 
2. Analyze the impact of environmental health hazards on human and animal health 
3. Evaluate the role of One Health in addressing zoonotic diseases and controlling antimicrobial 
resistance 
4. Identify emerging One Health challenges and innovations 
5. Discuss ethical considerations in One Health research and practice 
Text Books: 
1. One Health: People, Animals and the Environment by Ronald M. Atlas and Stanley Maloy 
2. One Health: The Human-Animal-Environment Interfaces in Emerging Infectious Diseases by 
John S. Mackenzie and Martyn Jeggo 
Reference Books: 
1. One Health: The Theory and Practice of Integrated Health Approaches edited by Jakob Zinsstag, 
Esther Schelling, David Waltner-Toews and Maxine Whittaker 
2. One Health and the Politics of Antimicrobial Resistance edited by Laura H. Kahn, Bruce Kaplan 
and Thomas P. Monath 
3. The One Health Initiative: A Global Movement to Achieve Sustainable Health and Well-being 
edited by Bruce Kaplan and Thomas P. Monath. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201K    BASIC EMERGENCY CARE AND LIFE SUPPORT SKILLS           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                 3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
This course introduces students to the fundamental skills required for providing basic emergency care 
and life support. It covers essential techniques in CPR, AED use, and basic first aid to prepare students 
for real-life emergency situations. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. To understand the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. To acquire essential first aid skills. 
3. To know the use of AED 
4. To get trained in the practical aspects of CPR. 
5. To know the various assessment aspects of a patient in an emergency 
 
UNIT-I Basic Life Support (BLS) and CPR       9 Hrs 
Introduction to BLS and CPR, Steps of Adult, Child, and Infant CPR, Airway Management, Rescue 
Breathing and Chest Compressions 
 
UNIT-II Automated External Defibrillator (AED)      9 Hrs 
What is an AED? When and How to Use an AED, Safety Precautions, Different types of Defibrillators 
 
UNIT-III Basic First Aid Techniques      9 Hrs 
Principles of First Aid, Managing Bleeding and Wounds, Fractures and Sprains, Burns and Scalds. 
  
UNIT-IV Recognizing Medical Emergencies      9 Hrs 
Identifying Common Medical Emergencies, Initial Assessment and Response, Managing Breathing and 
Cardiac Emergencies. 
 
UNIT-V Practical Skills Practice       9 Hrs 
Hands-on CPR Practice, AED Operation Drills, First Aid Skills Practice, Scenario-Based Training 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Acquire a thorough knowledge of the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. Apply essential first aid skills. 
3. Demonstrate the use of AED in Emergencies. 
 
4. Demonstrate the practical aspects of CPR  
5. Evaluate various assessment plans by the specific emergency. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Basic Life Support Provider Manual" by American Heart Association Pang, Ning Tan, Michael 
Steinbach and Vipin Kumar “Introduction to Data Mining”,  Pearson Education, 2007. 
2. "First Aid Manual" by St. John Ambulance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201L                       BASICS OF HEALTH MANAGEMENT                          L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides an essential foundation in health management, focusing on key areas such as basic 
life support, first aid, stroke management, and the prevention and management of both communicable 
and non-communicable diseases. Students will develop practical skills and knowledge to effectively 
manage health-related situations in various settings. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. To understand the principles and techniques of basic life support. 
2. To acquire essential first aid skills. 
3. To comprehend the causes, symptoms, and management of stroke. 
4. To learn about non-communicable diseases, their risk factors, and management strategies. 
5. To understand communicable diseases, their transmission, prevention, and control. 
 
UNIT-I Basic Life Support                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Overview of Basic Life Support (BLS), Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) Techniques, Use of 
Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs), Airway Management and Breathing Support, BLS Protocols 
and Procedures 
 
UNIT-II First Aid                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Introduction to First Aid Principles, Managing Wounds and Bleeding, Fractures and Musculoskeletal 
Injuries, Burns and Scalds Treatment, Handling Medical Emergencies (e.g., heart attack, choking, 
seizures) 
 
UNIT-III Stroke                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Understanding Stroke: Types and Causes, Symptoms and Warning Signs of Stroke, Immediate 
Response and Management, Stroke Rehabilitation and Recovery, Prevention and Risk Reduction 
Strategies 
  
UNIT-IV Non-Communicable Diseases                                                                             9 Hrs 
Definition and Classification of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs), Common NCDs: Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Diabetes, Cancer, Chronic Respiratory Diseases, Risk Factors and Prevention Strategies, 
 
Management and Treatment Approaches, Public Health Implications and Policy Responses 
 
UNIT-V Communicable Diseases                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Introduction to Communicable Diseases, Modes of Transmission and Epidemiology, Prevention and 
Control Measures (e.g., vaccination, hygiene, quarantine), Management of Common Communicable 
Diseases (e.g., TB, HIV/AIDS, Influenza), Emerging Infectious Diseases and Global Health Security 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Perform basic life support techniques. 
2. Administer essential first aid. 
3. Recognize and manage stroke symptoms and treatments. 
4. Understand and address non-communicable diseases. 
5. Implement communicable disease control measures. 
 
Text Books: 
1. "Basic Life Support Provider Manual" by American Heart Association 
2.  "First Aid Manual" by St. John Ambulance, St. Andrew's First Aid, and the British Red Cross 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Stroke: Practical Guide to Management" by Charles P. Warlow 
2.  "Non-Communicable Diseases in the Developing World" by Rachel Nugent 
3.  "Communicable Disease Control and Health Protection Handbook" by Jeremy Hawker et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201N                                ENTREPRENEURSHIP                                             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of entrepreneurship, its applications, and its scope. 
Students will learn to generate broad ideas for starting an enterprise or startup and convert them into 
viable opportunities. The course covers the essentials of managing startups, understanding small and 
medium enterprises, and gaining knowledge of various financial institutions. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the concept of Entrepreneurship, its applications and scope. 
2. Application of knowledge for generating a broad idea for a starting an enterprise/start up and 
converting to opportunity. 
3. Knowledge of managing the start-up's 
4. Understand the small and medium enterprises 
5. Knowledge of different financial institutions 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                       9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship: Definition and Concept of entrepreneurship - Entrepreneur Characteristics – 
Classification of Entrepreneurs –Role of Entrepreneurship in Economic Development 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Idea to Opportunity- Introduction, Sources of New Ideas, Techniques for Generating Ideas, Assessing 
Business Potential of an Idea, Opportunity Recognition, Sources and process, Indian Economy—
Opportunities, Steps Involved in Tapping Opportunity 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship Development - Intrapreneurship, Entrepreneurship as a Career Option, Female 
Entrepreneurship and problems, Types of Start-ups, Start-ups and mistakes, Managing Start-ups During 
Downturn 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Entrepreneurship Trends- Small and Medium Business Enterprises, International Entrepreneurship, 
Entrepreneurship—Emerging Trends in the Global Knowledge Economy 
 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Institutions Supporting and Taxation Benefits: Central level Institutions: NABARD; SIDBI,– State 
Level Institutions –DICs – SFC - Government Policy for MSMEs - Tax Incentives and Concessions. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic understanding of entrepreneurship  
2. Knowledge of idea generation and opportunities identification of entrepreneurship  
3. Understand different forms of enterprises 
4. Understand different emerging trends of entrepreneurship 
5. Knowledge of different financial institutions 
Text Books: 
1. Arya Kumar, Entrepreneurship, Pearson, Delhi  
2. Poornima MCH, Entrepreneurship Development –Small Business Enterprises, Pearson, Delhi  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Anil Kumar, S., ET.al., Entrepreneurship Development, New Age International Publishers, New 
Delhi 
2. Khanka, SS, Entrepreneurship Development, S. Chand, New Delhi  
3. Peter F. Drucker,Innovation and Entrepreneurship  
4. A.Sahay, M. S. Chhikara, New Vistas of Entrepreneurship: Challenges &Opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201O                            MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS                                     L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides a solid foundation in the fundamentals of economics and managerial economics. 
Students will learn to apply concepts of production cost and revenues for effective business decisions. 
The course also covers analyzing capital investments to maximize returns, understanding different 
forms of business organizations, and evaluating business organizations and marketing strategies. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the fundamentals of Economics and Managerial economics 
2. Apply the Concept of Production cost and revenues for effective Business decision 
3. Analyze how to invest their capital and maximize returns. 
4. Understand different forms of business organizations 
5. Evaluate Business organizations and marketing strategies 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Introduction: Meaning, Nature, Significance, Functions, and Advantages, ME and its role in other 
fields. Demand - Concept, Function, Law of Demand - Demand Elasticity- Types – Measurement. 
Demand Forecasting- Factors governing forecasting and methods.  
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Production: Introduction – Nature, meaning, significance, functions and advantages. Production 
Function– Least- cost combination– Short run and Long run Production Function- Isoquants and 
Isocosts, MRTS - Cobb-Douglas Production Function - Laws of Returns 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Cost & Break-Even Analysis - Cost concepts and Cost behavior- Break-Even Analysis (BEA) - 
Determination of Break-Even Point (Simple Problems)-Managerial significance and limitations of 
Break-Even Analysis. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Business Organizations Introduction – Nature, meaning, significance, functions and advantages. Forms 
of Business Organizations- Sole Proprietary - Partnership - Joint Stock Companies - Public Sector 
Enterprises. 
 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Markets Types of Markets - Perfect and Imperfect Competition - Features of Perfect Competition 
Monopoly- Monopolistic Competition–Oligopoly-Price-Output Determination - Pricing Methods and 
Strategies. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic understanding of managerial economics  
2. Develop an understanding of the applications of production 
3. Interpret cost analysis 
4. Understand different forms of business organizations. 
5. Analyse the causes and consequences of different market conditions. 
 
Text Books:  
1. Varshney & Maheswari: Managerial Economics, Sultan Chand, 2013. 
2. Aryasri: Business Economics and Financial Analysis, 4/e, MGH, 2019. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Ahuja Hl Managerial economics Schand,3/e,2013 
2. S.A. Siddiqui and A.S. Siddiqui: Managerial Economics and Financial Analysis, New Age 
International, 2013. 
3. Joseph G. Nellis and David Parker: Principles of Business Economics, Pearson, 2/e, New 
Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201P                                 ORGANIC FARMING                                               L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
By the end of the course, students will be equipped with the knowledge and skills to plan, establish, and 
manage organic farms effectively. This course serves as a foundation for aspiring organic farmers, 
agricultural professionals, and individuals interested in sustainable food production and environmental 
conservation. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To Understand the principles and practices of organic farming. 
2. To Analyze the environmental, economic, and social implications of conventional versus organic 
agricultural systems. 
3. To Apply organic farming techniques to enhance soil health and fertility. 
4. To Examine the certification processes and regulations governing organic farming. 
5. To explore ways to engage with local communities and promote organic practices. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Introduction to Organic Farming, Overview of organic farming principles and practices, Historical 
development and evolution of organic agriculture, Importance of organic farming in sustainable 
agriculture, Comparison between conventional and organic farming systems, Certification and 
regulatory requirements for organic farming. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Soil Health and Management, Importance of soil health in organic farming, Soil composition and 
structure, Soil fertility management without synthetic inputs, Soil conservation techniques: cover 
cropping, crop rotation, mulching, Composting and vermicomposting for organic matter enrichment. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Crop Management in Organic Systems, Selection of suitable crops for organic farming, Organic seed 
selection, saving, and sourcing, Crop planning and rotation strategies, Weed management without 
herbicides: mechanical, cultural, and biological control methods, Pest and disease management in 
organic systems: integrated pest management (IPM), biological control, and natural remedies. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Organic Livestock Management, Principles of organic livestock production, Organic feed sourcing and 
 
formulation, Housing and space requirements for organic livestock, Health care and disease 
management without antibiotics and synthetic chemicals, Organic certification requirements for 
livestock operations. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Marketing and Economics of Organic Farming, Market trends and consumer demand for organic 
products, Certification and labeling requirements for organic products, Marketing strategies for organic 
farmers: direct sales, farmers markets, CSA (Community Supported Agriculture), Economic viability 
and profitability of organic farming, Government support programs and incentives for organic farmers. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course the student shall be able to, 
1. Demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of the principles of organic farming and their 
application in agricultural systems. 
2. Critically evaluate the sustainability of different agricultural practices, considering 
environmental impact, economic viability, and social equity. 
3. Design and implement an organic farming plan for a specific crop or agricultural enterprise. 
4. Analyze case studies and research articles to assess the effectiveness of organic farming 
practices in various contexts. 
5. Communicate effectively about organic farming principles and practices, both orally and in 
writing. 
Text Books: 
1. "Teaming with Microbes: The Organic Gardener's Guide to the Soil Food Web" by Jeff 
Lowenfels and Wayne Lewis  
2. "The Organic Farmer's Business Handbook: A Complete Guide to Managing Finances, Crops, 
and Staff - and Making a Profit" by Richard Wiswall  
Reference Books: 
1. "Introduction to Permaculture" by Bill Mollison  
2. "Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual" by Charles L. Mohler and Sue Ellen 
Johnson  
3. "The Organic Farming Manual: A Comprehensive Guide to Starting and Running a Certified 
Organic Farm" by Anne Larkin Hansen  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201Q      PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT            L T  P C 
                       3  0  0  3 
Course Description:  
Personality Development is a comprehensive course designed to equip undergraduates with the essential 
skills and knowledge required for personal growth and professional success. The course focuses on 
enhancing self-awareness, emotional intelligence, communication, and interpersonal skills. Students will 
learn how to build confidence, manage stress, and develop effective time management strategies. 
Additionally, the course covers critical aspects of professional development, including resume writing, 
interview techniques, and personal branding. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To develop self-awareness and emotional intelligence. 
2. To enhance communication and interpersonal skills. 
3. To build confidence and self-esteem. 
4. To foster professional and personal growth. 
5. To prepare students for successful careers and meaningful personal lives. 
 
UNIT-I Introduction to Personality Development                                 9 Hrs 
Definition and importance of personality development; Initial self-assessment and goal setting; Short
term and long-term goal setting; Understanding oneself: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats 
(SWOT analysis); Values, beliefs, and attitudes; Personal vision and mission statements; Components of 
emotional intelligence (EQ); Self-regulation and self-motivation; Empathy and social skills. 
 
UNIT-II Communication Skills and Interpersonal Skills                              9 Hrs 
 Communication Skills; Verbal and non-verbal communication; Active listening and feedback; Public 
speaking and presentation skills; Building and maintaining relationships; Conflict resolution and 
negotiation; Teamwork and collaboration; Importance of cultural sensitivity in a globalized world; 
Developing intercultural communication skills 
 
UNIT-III Critical Thinking, Problem Solving and Self-Esteem                            9 Hrs 
Enhancing analytical and critical thinking skills; Creative problem-solving techniques Decision-making 
process; Confidence and Self-Esteem; Building self-confidence; Overcoming self-doubt and negative 
thinking; Techniques for boosting self-esteem. 
 
UNIT-IV Time Management and Stress Management                              7 Hrs 
 
Prioritization and productivity techniques; Overcoming procrastination; Identifying sources of stress; 
Techniques for managing and reducing stress; Work-life balance. 
 
UNIT-V Professional Development and Leadership Skills                           11 Hrs 
Resume writing and job interview skills; Professional etiquette and workplace behavior Networking 
skills; Traits of effective leaders; Leadership styles and theories; Developing leadership qualities; 
Personal Branding, Building a personal brand; Online presence and social media etiquette; Personal 
branding strategies; Final self-assessment and reflection on personal growth 
 
Course Outcomes:  
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Develop a personal vision and mission statement to guide future actions and decisions. 
2. Exhibit improved verbal and non-verbal communication skills. 
3. Apply strategies to boost self-confidence and maintain high self-esteem. 
4. Implement effective time management techniques to enhance productivity. 
5. Develop and demonstrate leadership qualities in various scenarios. 
 
 
Text Books:  
1. Student’s Hand Book- Skill Genie-Higher Education Department, Govt. Of Andhra Pradesh 
https://svimstpt.ap.nic.in/edu/skill_genie.pdf. 
2. The only skill that matters- Jonathan.Levi (2019)- Super Human Enterprises, LLC. All rights 
reserved. ISBN:978-1-5445-0435-3 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Online courses and TED Talks on personality development and self-improvement. 
2. "How to Win Friends and Influence People" by Dale Carnegie (1936) Revised- 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1201R                                      SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP                       L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course explores the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies, and politics. Students 
will learn about the three pillars of social entrepreneurship and the different types of partners and their 
advantages. The course also covers the typical process steps of creating a marketing concept and 
describes the characteristics of the financing structure of social enterprises. 
 
Course Objectives:  
1. Understand the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies and politics 
2. Explain the three pillars of social entrepreneurship. 
3. Describe different types of partners for social entrepreneurs and their particular advantages. 
4. Understand the typical process steps of a marketing conception. 
5. Describe the characteristics of the financing structure of social enterprises. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Introduction - Meaning of social entrepreneurship- concepts and typologies, its disparity with social 
business and CSR, social entrepreneur & personality, social enterprise. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Drivers and scope: Role of Social Entrepreneurship in -Societies, Economies and Politics, The Drivers 
of Social Entrepreneurship, Size and Scope of Social Entrepreneurship, Opportunities for Social 
Entrepreneurs. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs                                                                                                
Collaboration and Partnerships - Reasons for Crafting Collaborations, Specific Types of 
Collaborations, Different Collaboration Partners, Potential Risks and Challenges, Guidelines to 
Establish a Collaboration. 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Elements of a Marketing Conception- Market analysis, Marketing Goals, Competitive Strategy, 
Measures, Controlling; Peculiarities Concerning Marketing for Social Enterprises, Marketing 
Importance for Social Enterprises.  
 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Finance- Types of Financing Instruments- Donations, Equity capital, Debt capital, Hybrid capital; 
Financing institutions-value banks, social investment advisors, social stock exchange, Venture 
Philanthropy Funds, Social Investment Funds, Funding Consultancies 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Knowledge of social entrepreneurship differentiation from other related concepts 
2. Understand the role of social entrepreneurship in societies, economies and politics 
3. Analysis of different types of partners for social entrepreneurs. 
4. Understand the typical process steps of a marketing conception. 
5. Awareness of the peculiarities of financial elements in social enterprises 
Text Books:  
1. Christine K. Volkmann & Kim Oliver Tokarski. 2012.Social Entrepreneurship and Social 
Business. Springer Gabler 
2. Madhukar Shukla: Social Entrepreneurship in India. Sage publications 
Reference Books: 
1. Archana Singh (auth.) The Process of Social Value Creation: A Multiple-Case Study on Social 
Entrepreneurship in India. Springer India.2016. 
2. Ryszard Praszkier; Andrzej Nowak. Social entrepreneurship : theory and practice [1 ed.]. 
Cambridge University Press 
3. Alex Nicholls. Social Entrepreneurship: New Models of Sustainable Social Change. Oxford 
University Press, USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II SEMESTER 
 
 
AHSJ1304                               MICROBIOLOGY                     L   T   P C 
                                                                                                                                                   3   1   2  5 
Course Description: This course will cover on general properties of pathogenic bacteria, viruses, fungi 
and parasites along with immune mechanisms, its response, methods of sterilization and disinfection, 
healthcare associated infections and hospital infection control practices. It helps the student to understand 
the natural history of infectious diseases to deal with etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, laboratory 
diagnosis, treatment and control of infections in the community including immunoprophylaxis. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing the course shall be expected to: 
 Learn the general properties, structure and physiological aspects of bacteria and identification of 
bacteria. 
 Learn about infection, immunity, various antigen-antibody reactions, immune mechanisms and 
hypersensitivity reactions and various infection control practices. 
 Learn about pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis and prophylactic measures of various bacterial 
infections. 
 Learn about general properties of viruses and fungi and morphology, pathogenesis, laboratory 
diagnosis and prophylactic measures of various viral and fungal infections. 
 Learn about classification of parasites and their morphological forms, life cycle, pathogenesis, 
laboratory diagnosis and prophylactic measures of various parasitic infections. 
 
                                                                   THEORY                                            Total: 60 Hrs 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                             10 Hrs 
INTRODUCTION TO MEDICAL MICROBIOLOGY      
 Importance of Medical Microbiology 
 Historical aspects    
GENERAL PROPERTIES & PHYSIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF BACTERIA  
 Structure of bacteria and its appendages like capsule, flagella, pili and spore 
 Classification based on morphology, arrangement and motility 
 Microscopy & Staining techniques 
 Bacterial Growth Curve, Nutritional requirements of bacteria  
BACTERIAL IDENTIFICATION METHODS       
 Culture media, Culture Methods 
 Specimen collection and transport to the laboratory 
 Laboratory methods of Identification of Bacteria 
 
 Antibiotic Sensitivity testing – Diffusion and Dilution methods 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                          12 Hrs 
INFECTION CONTROL PRACTICES       
Infection – Definition, types and sources of infection, mode of transmission, types of infectious diseases, 
microbial pathogenicity 
 Sterilization, Disinfection and Asepsis 
 Standard Safety Precautions 
 Biomedical Waste Management 
 Hospital acquired infections, mode of spread, types and predisposing factors, investigation and 
surveillance         
IMMUNOLOGY         
Immunity – Definitions, terminology, Innate, acquired and herd immunity 
 Antigen & Antibody 
 Antigen-Antibody Reactions – Precipitation reactions, Agglutination reactions, ELISA, IFA 
 Immune response 
 Hypersensitivity - Definition and Classification and Type I, II, III, IV types of hypersensitivity 
 Immunoprophylaxis – Immunization schedule, vaccines, storage & handling, hazards of 
immunization 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                       16 Hrs 
PATHOGENIC BACTERIA– Morphology, pathogenicity, laboratory diagnosis and prophylaxis of the 
following organisms 
 Gram Positive Cocci: Staphylococci, Streptococci & Pneumococci 
 Gram Negative Cocci: Meningococci, Gonococci 
 Gram Positive Bacilli: Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium tetani, 
Clostridium botulinum, Bacillus anthracis, Bacillus cereus 
 Gram Negative Bacilli: Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Salmonella, Shigella, Vibrio, 
Bordetella, Hemophilus 
 Acid Fast bacilli: Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium leprae 
 Spirochaetes: Treponema, Borrelia, Leptospira 
 Ricketssiae 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                       12 Hrs 
GENERAL VIROLOGY        
 General Properties of Viruses – Structure, viral multiplication, viral cultivation, classification, 
inclusion bodies, antiviral agents 
 
 Specimen collection and transport of viral disease samples to laboratory 
PATHOGENIC VIRUSES – Morphology, Pathogenicity, laboratory diagnosis and prophylaxis of the 
following organisms 
 RNA Viruses – Polio virus, influenza virus, mumps virus, measles virus, rubella virus, rabies 
virus, dengue virus, chickungunya virus, Japanese encephalitis virus, 
 DNA Viruses – Herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster virus, Epstein Barr virus, Variola, 
Molluscum contagiosum, Adeno virus, Human Papilloma virus 
 Viral Hepatitis – Hepatitis A, B, C, D and E 
 Rota Virus 
 SARS Virus, Corona virus 
 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)     
PATHOGENIC FUNGI – Morphology, pathogenicity, laboratory diagnosis and prophylaxis of the 
following organisms 
 Introduction, classification of fungi and fungal diseases, antifungal agents 
 Superficial mycoses, subcutaneous mycoses, systemic mycoses and opportunistic mycoses 
 Mycetism and mycotoxicosis 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                         10 Hrs 
PARASITOLOGY – Mode of infection, pathogenicity, clinical picture, laboratory diagnosis of the 
following parasites 
 Protozoans: Entamoeba histolytica, Trichomonas vaginalis, Leishmania donovani, Plasmodium 
spp., Toxoplasma gondii, Pneumocystis jirovecii, Cryptosporidium parvum 
 Cestodes: Taeniasolium, Taenia saginata, Diphylobothrium latum 
 Trematodes: Schistosoma haematobium, Fasciola hepatica, Fasciolposis buskii, Clonrchis 
sinensis, Paragonimuswestermanii 
 Nematodes: Ascaris lumbricoides, Ankylostoma duodenale, Enterobius vermicularis, 
Strongyloidesstercoralis, Wucherariabancrofti 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course student should be able to: 
 Describe the General Properties and physiological aspects of Bacteria, Culture media, culture 
methods and identification of Bacteria. 
 Explain about immunity, antigen, antibody and various antigen-antibody reactions, immune 
mechanisms and hypersensitivity reactions along sterilization & disinfections methods and various 
infection control practices. 
 
 Describe the morphology, pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis and prophylactic measures of 
various bacterial infections. 
 Describe the General Properties of Viruses and Fungi and morphology, pathogenesis, laboratory 
diagnosis and prophylactic measures of various viral and fungal infections. 
 Classify the parasites and describe the morphological forms, life cycle, pathogenesis, laboratory 
diagnosis and prophylactic measures of various parasitic infections. 
 
PRACTICALS                                             Total: 30 Hrs 
Students undergoing the course shall be able to: 
 Perform commonly employed bed-side tests for detection of infectious agents such as blood film 
for malaria, filariasis, gram staining, AFB staining, serology and stool sample for ova and cyst. 
 Use the correct method of collection, storage and transport of clinical material for microbiological 
investigations 
The assessment of the students will be done with the help of following exercises: 
 Spotters 
 Performing Gram stain, Acid-fast staining 
 Stool Examination 
Textbooks: 
1. The Short Textbook of Medical Microbiology (including Parasitology): Satish Gupte 
2. Medical Parasitology: C P Baveja & V Baveja 
3. Ananthanarayan and Paniker’s Textbook of Microbiology for Nurses  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Ananthanarayan and Paniker’s Text book of Microbiology-12th Edition 
2. Apurba Sastry,S; Bhat,S; Essentials of Medical Microbiology –4th
  Edition 
3. Baveja. C.P; Text book of Microbiology – 7th
Edition 
4. Paniker’s Text book of Medical Parasitology – 9th
Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AHSJ1305                                                      PATHOLOGY  
                                                                                   L   T   P C 
                                                                                                                                 3   1  2 5 
Course Description:  
Pathology is a vast expanding and ever-changing subject and it's the key to understanding diseases 
worldwide. The allied health sciences are an endeavour to present this vast subject understandably to the 
learners.  
The aim of Teaching/learning Pathology at AHS is to provide knowledge/insight into etiology, 
pathogenesis, and pathophysiology &diseases.  
Course Objectives:  
 Describe the normal structure of a cell functions& its probable disease version. (cell in health 
disease)  
 Cellular responses to injury& Adaptations, reversible irreversible injuries  
 Inflammation & repair sequence of events happening during this.  
 Infections, hemodynamic, Immunopathology, neoplasia, nutritional genetic disorder in disease 
conditions  
 Systemic pathology ... Starting from the Heart, blood vessels, hematopathology. 
 System-wise diseases discussion respiratory, GIT, hepatobiliary, urinary, MGT, FGT, Breast, 
Bones & joints, endocrines, Diabetes, skin, CNS & eye.  
 Experiencing the practice of Clinical Pathology Starting with anticoagulants, HB estimation, 
blood, cell counts, hematocrit, PBS, ESR, RC, BM, examination, CSF, Semen analysis, urine 
&other body fluids. 
 make the student understand the overall subject matter.  
                                                           THEORY                                                    Total: 60 Hrs  
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                       12 Hrs 
General Pathology -General pathology provides an overview of the basic pathologic mechanisms 
underlying diseases including cellular adaptations, inflammation, tissue repair, Chronic inflammation, 
hemodynamic disorders, immunological disorders, neoplasia, genetics and effects of radiation.  
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                    12 Hrs 
Systemic Pathology 1 -Deals with various organ systems like vascular, Cardiac, LN, Respiratory system, 
head and neck, GIT, liver & hepatobiliary system.  
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                  12 Hrs 
Systemic Pathology 2- pancreas, Urinary, Male genital system, female genital system, breast, bones, 
joints, soft tissue tumors, endocrines, Diabetes, Skin, CNS, peripheral nerves &Skeletal system.  
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                  12 Hrs 
Haemato pathology -Disorders of RBCs, WBCs, Platelets, anaemias, leukaemias, disorders of hemostasis, 
 
coagulation disorders, plasma cell disorders& blood 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                   12 Hrs 
Clinical pathology – deals with anticoagulants, Hb estimation blood cell counts, hematocrit, ESR, 
Reticulocyte count, BM examination, semen analysis, CSF and other body fluids analysis, urine 
examination  
Course outcome:  
At the end of the course, the student can able to expand/ learn 
 Define& practice of Pathology  
 Haematological consequences of the disease process 
 Can able to expand the Pathogenesis, pathophysiology, clinical consequences of disease process, 
complications 
 
                                                 PRACTICALS                                           Total: 30 Hrs  
 (Only theoretical lectures as there is no provision of technicians, or logistics provided for practicals for 
AHS students). 
Hb estimation, RBC count, WBC count, platelet count, PBS, ESR, PCV, fluids, Urine examination. 
Assessment of the student will be: 
 Assignments 
 Midterm examinations 
 Workbook  
References  
 A well-illustrated textbook is available for AHS students – Text of pathology for AHS students – 
DR. Ramdas Nayak  
 Robbins &cotran text book of pathology  
 Harsh mohan text book of pathology  
 Anderson’s text book of pathology  
 Bancroft text book of histological techniques  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AHSJ1306                             PHARMACOLOGY                                  L   T   P C 
                                                                                                                                      3   1   2 5 
Course Description: 
This course will cover general pharmacology with special emphasis on common drugs used, drug 
nomenclature, their routes of drug administration, dosage formulations, dose and frequency of 
administration. 
This course also covers side effects, toxicity, management of their toxicity and drug interactions. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
 Describe the general principles of drug action, handling of drugs by the body and drugs acting on 
ANS & autacoid system. 
 Explain the mechanism of action, therapeutic uses and adverse effects of drugs used in common 
CNS disorders.  
 Explain the mechanism of action, therapeutic uses and adverse effects of drugs used in common 
cardiovascular diseases and haematological disorders. 
 Explain the mechanism of action, therapeutic uses and adverse effects drugs used in common 
endocrine, respiratory and gastrointestinal disorders. 
 Enlist drugs used in common infections, cancers and immunological disorders and explain their 
mechanism of action. 
 
                                                                     THEORY                                           Total: 60 Hrs 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                               12 Hrs 
General Pharmacology: Introduction, Definitions, Sources of Drugs, Drug nomenclature –Routes of 
administration & Pharmacokinetics – Pharmacodynamics – Factors modifying drug action – Adverse 
Drug Effects & Pharmacovigilance.    
Drugs Acting on Autonomic Nervous System: Cholinergic Drugs –Anticholinergic Drugs – Adrenergic 
Drugs – Antiadrenergic Drugs  
Autacoids and Related Drugs: Histamine and Anti-histaminics –Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes 
(Eicosanoids) and Platelet Activating Factor – Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (Antipyretic
Analgesics).                                                                  
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                 9 Hrs 
Drugs Acting on Central Nervous System: General Anaesthetics –Local anaesthetics– Sedative & 
Hypnotics – Antiepileptic Drugs – Antiparkinsonian Drugs – Antipsychotic and mood stabilizers – 
Antidepressant and Antianxiety Drugs – Opioid Analgesics and Antagonists – Skeletal muscle relaxants. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                              11 Hrs 
Cardiovascular Drugs: Drugs Affecting Renin-Angiotensin System & CCBs –Diuretics – Cardiac 
 
Glycosides and Drugs for Heart Failure – Antianginal Drugs –Antihypertensive Drugs – Antiarrhythmic 
Drugs – Hypolipidemic Drugs  
Drugs Affecting Blood and Blood Formation: Haematinics and Erythropoietin – 
Coagulants & Anticoagulants – Antiplatelet drugs & Fibrinolytics – IV fluids, Plasma expanders & Drugs 
for shock. 
 UNIT-IV                                                                                                                            10 Hrs 
Hormones and Related Drugs: Introduction, Thyroid Hormone and Thyroid Inhibitors –Insulin, Oral 
Hypoglycaemic Drugs and Glucagon – Corticosteroids– Sex hormones & Hormonal Contraceptives 
Drugs Affecting Calcium Balance – Tocolytics & Ecbolics. 
Respiratory System Drugs: Drugs for Cough – Drugs for Bronchial Asthma  
Gastrointestinal Drugs: Drugs for Peptic Ulcer and Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease – Antiemetic & 
Prokinetic drugs – Drugs for Constipation and Diarrhoea   
UNIT-V                                                                                                                               18 Hrs 
Antimicrobial Drugs: Beta-Lactam Antibiotics- Penicillins – Cephalosporins, Monobactams & 
Carbapenems – Sulfonamides, Cotrimoxazole and Quinolones – Tetracyclines and Macrolides 
Aminoglycosides and Misc. Antibacterial Antibiotics – Antitubercular Drugs & Antileprotic Drugs 
Antifungal Drugs – Antiviral Drugs (Non- retroviral) – Antiviral Drugs (Anti - retroviral) – Antimalarial 
Drugs – Antiamoebic and Other Antiprotozoal Drugs – Anthelmintic Drugs  
Chemotherapy of Neoplastic Diseases: Anticancer Drugs  
Miscellaneous Drugs: Immunosuppressant Drugs – Drugs Acting on Skin and Mucous Membranes – 
Antiseptics and Disinfectants – Ocular Pharmacology 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
 Apply the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics principles that describe drug actions.  
 Explain the rationale for selection of suitable drugs used in various CNS disorders. 
 Explain the rationale for selection of suitable drugs used in various cardiovascular and 
haematological disorders. 
 Explain the rationale for selection of suitable drugs used in various endocrine, respiratory and 
gastrointestinal disorders. 
Explain the rationale for selection of suitable drugs used in common infections, cancers and 
immunological disorders. 
PRACTICALS                                             Total: 30 Hrs 
 
Course Objective: The course will cover general pharmacology with special emphasis on route of 
administration, type of formulations, dose and frequency of administration, importance of manufacturing 
and expiry dates, storage instructions of each drug, calculation of drug doses and general principles in the 
 
management of poisoning. 
The assessment of the students will be done with the help of following exercises. 
 Spotters 
 Dosage calculations 
 Dosage formulations 
Textbooks: 
1. Textbook of Pharmacology for Dental & Allied Health Sciences – Padmaja Uday Kumar- 5th 
edition- 2023. 
2. Fundamentals of Pharmacology for Allied Health Science- Dr Pradnya Deolekar- 3rd edition- 2019. 
3. Textbook of Pharmacology for Allied Sciences- Kamalakannan - 3rd edition- 2019. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Essentials of Medical Pharmacology - K.D. Tripathi- 8th edition Reprint-2023. 
2. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology. Katzung BG (Ed), Publisher: Prentice Hall International Ltd., 
London- 15th Edition-2021. 
 
 
EMTT1501                   FUNDAMENTALS OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
                                          L T P C 
3 0  0 3 
Course Description: This course offers a a broad spectrum of urgent medical situations, including 
wounds, bleeding, shock, cerebrovascular accidents (strokes), seizures, faints, extreme body temperatures, 
diabetes-related emergencies, and asphyxia, the curriculum is designed to equip students with the 
necessary knowledge and skills to handle emergencies effectively. Through theoretical understanding and 
practical applications, students will learn to assess, diagnose, and provide immediate care, ensuring 
improved patient outcomes. 
Course Objectives: At the end of the course the students will acquire knowledge of the following 
Aspects 
1.Understand the types and sources of bleeding, factors affecting bleeding severity, and appropriate 
wound care techniques to manage and monitor patients effectively. 
2. Recognize the causes and pathophysiology of different types of shock, including hypovolemic, septic, 
and anaphylactic shock, and apply early intervention strategies to mitigate shock's effects. 
3.Comprehend the pathophysiology, signs, and symptoms of strokes and seizures, and develop skills to 
manage these conditions, focusing on airway management, positioning, and medication administration. 
4. Identify and treat conditions related to abnormal body temperatures, such as hypothermia, 
hyperthermia, heat stroke, and malignant hyperthermia, ensuring patient stabilization and recovery. 
5. Manage diabetes-related emergencies (hypoglycaemia, hyperglycaemia, and diabetic ketoacidosis) and 
understand the causes, immediate response, and management of asphyxia, including airway maintenance 
and oxygen therapy. 
TOTAL: 45 Hours 
COURSE PLAN                                                                                                                                         
UNIT 1 : EMT                                                                                                                                            9 Hours 
Introduction to EMD, Roles and Responsibilities of the paramedic, Work force safety and wellness 
Public Health, Medical, Legal and Ethical Issues, Medical Terminology,Ambulance Service, History 
Taking, Patient Transfer Equipment 
UNIT 2: Pharmacology                                                                                                                         9 Hours 
Principles of Pharmacology in Emergency Medicine, Medication Administration 
UNIT 3 : Physiology                                                                                                                               9 Hours 
Respiratory, Circulatory, Reproductive, Liver, Renal System 
UNIT 4 : Examination                                                                                                                           9 Hours 
Respiratory system, Reproductive System, Renal Failure, Circulatory System, Abdominal System 
Basic Airway Devices: OPA, NPA, Oxygen Mask( BVM), Laryngoscope, Nasal Cannula, LMA 
 
UNIT 5 : Fluids and Electrolytes                                                                                                           9 Hours 
Water and Sodium Balance, Hypotonic, Hypertonic, Isotonic, Plasma Volume Expander, Blood Products 
Blood grouping, Cross Matching 
Course Outcome: After completing this course, the student will be able to: 
1. Identify the various types of bleeding, shock, stroke, seizures, temperature extremes, diabetes 
emergencies, and asphyxia, and their basic characteristics and terminologies. 
2. Explain the pathophysiology, signs, and symptoms associated with these conditions and the 
importance of early recognition and intervention 
3. Assess the severity of different medical emergencies, determine the appropriate medical 
procedures, and analyze patient responses to interventions 
4. Evaluate the effectiveness of emergency medical interventions, refine patient care strategies based 
on outcomes, and ensure adherence to best practices for improving patient survival and recovery 
rates 
5. Giving treatment of environmental related injuries like sun burn etc. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and bartlett 
publishers. 
2. Tintinalli Emergency Medicine Manual – 8 th Edition – RITA K.CYDULKA, DAVID M.CLINE O. 
JOHN MA 
3. Adams Emergency Medicine ,Adams, Erick D.Barton-Saunders Elsevier 
Reference Books: 
1. Emergency Medicine -2nd Edition, Plantz ,Wipfler - Lippincott Williams and Wilkins 
2. Rosens Emergency Medicine - 7 th Edition Marx,Hock berger walls, Adams-Mosby Elsevier 
3. Principles and Practice of Management by LM Prasad
 
 
 
TAUT1102                                 ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES                                 L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides degree-seeking students with an array of opportunities to learn, practice and 
motivate communities on environmental importance. It further helps to understand the resources, 
optimize the recourses in future days, and address the gaps in the eco system. 
 
Course Objectives:  
Students undergoing this course are expected to:  
1. Understand eco system and scope of multidisciplinary 
2. Creating the awareness about environmental problems among people.  
3. Imparting basic knowledge about the environment and its allied problems. 
4. Developing an attitude of concern for the environment. 
5. Understand the developments in global goals 
Unit-I                         8 Hrs 
Multidisciplinary nature of environmental studies; Definition, scope and importance; Need for public 
awareness; Natural Resources: Renewable and non-renewable resources; Forest resources: Water 
resources: Mineral resources; Food resources: Energy resources: Land resources; Equitable use of 
resources for sustainable lifestyles; Natural resources and associated problems. 
 
Unit-II                           8 Hrs 
Ecosystems: Concept of an ecosystem.; Introduction, types, characteristic features, structure and function 
of the following ecosystem: - Forest ecosystem; Grassland ecosystem; Desert ecosystem; Aquatic 
ecosystems (ponds, streams, lakes, rivers, oceans, estuaries); Environment Protection Act,1986; Public 
awareness.; Environment and human health.  
 
Unit-III                            8 Hrs 
Biodiversity and its conservation: Introduction – Definition- genetic, species and ecosystem diversity.; 
Biogeographical classification of India; India as a mega-diversity nation; Hot-sports of biodiversity.; 
Threats to biodiversity: habitat loss, poaching of wildlife, man-wildlife conflicts.; Endangered and 
endemic species of India; Conservation of biodiversity: In-situ and Ex-situ conservation of biodiversity. 
 
Unit- IV                          8 Hrs 
Environmental Pollution Definition; Cause, effects and control measures of Air pollution; Water 
pollution; Soil pollution; Marine pollution; Noise pollution; Thermal pollution and nuclear hazards - 
 
Solid waste Management: Causes, effects and control measures of urban and industrial wastes. -  Role of 
an individual in prevention of pollution - Disaster management: floods, earthquake, cyclone and 
landslides. 
Unit-V                            8 Hrs 
Social Issues and the Environment: From Unsustainable to Sustainable development; Water 
conservation- rain water harvesting- watershed management; Resettlement and rehabilitation of people; 
its problems and concerns.; Environmental ethics: Issues and possible solutions.; Climate change, global 
warming, acid rain, ozone layer depletion, nuclear accidents and holocaust - Wasteland reclamation.; 
Consumerism and waste products.; Population and environment. 
Field work                                    5 Hrs 
Field visits to nearby; awareness campaign; special lectures by experts; quiz, debate competitions, 
short film Contest, rally etc 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of this course, students should be able to:   
1. Understand key concepts from economic, political, and social analysis as they pertain to the 
design and evaluation of environmental policies and institutions. 
2. Appreciate concepts and methods from ecological and physical sciences and their application in 
environmental problem solving. 
3. Appreciate the ethical, cross-cultural, and historical context of environmental issues and the links 
between human and natural systems. 
4. Reflect critically about their roles and identities as citizens, consumers and environmental activists 
5. Be part in Development goals and educating the communities. 
Text Books: 
1. Textbook of Environmental Studies (English, Paperback, Asthana D. K.) S.Chand & co , New 
Delhi 
2. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses, Erach B Haruchu, UGC, 
KINDLE Edition, Amazon. 
 Reference Book: 
1. Encyclopedia of Environment and Society- set of 5 volumes, Sage Publications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1202C             HINDI                                                            L T  P C 
                                                                                                                                    3  0 0 3 
Course Description: 
बच्चों में हिन्दी पढ़ने, हिखने की क्षमता बढ़ाना । आपस में अपनी भावनाओों कच प्रकट करने की क्षमता बढ़ाना मुख्य 
उद्देश्य िै। 
Course Objectives: 
1. सोंज्ञा, सोंज्ञा के प्रकार,सववनाम, सववनाम के प्रकार, हिया, हिया के प्रकार, िर्शेषण, िर्शेषण 
के         
   प्रकार 
2. हिोंग, वचन, काि, वाच्य, अर्व, हविचम र्शब्द, र्शब्दचों का वाक्य में प्रयचग 
3. हिोंदी सीखने की आश्यवकता बताते हुए छचटी बिन के नाम पर पत्र।,  
  हविार यात्रा का वणवन करते हुए अपने ममत्र के नाम पत्र।, 
  र्शूल्क भरने के हिए पैसे भेजने अपने िपता के नाम पत्र। 
4. कफन - प्रेमचोंद, वापसी - उषा हप्रयम्वदा यर्शपाि – परदा 
5. यरकान्त हत्रपाठी हनरािा - जूिी की किी,मिादेवी वमाव - मैं नीर भरी दुख की बदिी,       
 सुममत्रानोंदन पोंत - भारत माता    
UNIT-I        9 Hrs 
1. सोंज्ञा, सोंज्ञा के प्रकार 
2. सववनाम, सववनाम के प्रकार 
3. हिया, हिया के प्रकार 
4. हवर्शेषण, हवर्शेषण के प्रकार 
UNIT-II             9 Hrs 
1. हिोंग,वचन, काि,कारक  
2. अर्व, हविचम र्शब्द 
3. र्शब्दचों का वाक्य में प्रयचग 
UNIT-III    (पत्र लेखन )                         9 Hrs 
1. हिोंदी सीखने की आवश्यकता बताते हुए छचटी बिन के नाम पर पत्र। 
2. हविार यात्रा का वणवन करते हुए अपने हमत्र के नाम पत्र। 
3. र्शूल्क भरने के हिए पैसे भेजने अपने हपता के नाम पत्र। 
UNIT-IV  ( कहानी और कहानीकार)                                                                            9 Hrs 
1. कफन  - प्रेमचोंद          
 
2. वापसी - उषा हप्रयम्वदा 
3. यर्शपाि – परदा 
UNIT-V (कवि और कविता )                                                                                             9 Hrs 
1. सूयवकाोंत हत्रपाठी हनरािा - जूिी की कािी 
2. मिादेवी वमाव - मैं नीर भरी दुख की बदिी 
3. सुहमत्रानोंदन पोंत - भारत माता  
Course Outcomes: 
1. बच्चों में पढने का क्षमता बढाना 
2. हिखने की क्षमता बढाना 
3. बचिने की क्षमता बढाना 
4. भाषा के प्रित रुिच उत्पन्न कराना 
5. दैनोंददन जीनव में भाषा का प्रयचग करना 
Text Books: 
1. हिन्दी व्याकरण 
2. हवश्वनार् हतवारी की हिोंदी कहवता 
3. प्रेमचोंद की किाहनयाों 
Reference Books: 
हवहवहि प्रकार के किानी और व्याकरण के हकताबें सोंदभव ग्रोंर् सूची 
1. हिन्दी व्याकरण -काोंता रानी मोंजूषा,िरदेव हबिारी 
2.हवश्वनाद प्रसाद हतवारी - हिोंदी कहवता  
3.हवश्वनाद प्रसाद हतवारी- आिुहनक हिोंदी कहवता 
4.पुष्पपाि हसोंि - समकािीन हिोंदी कहवता 
 
 
 
TAUT1202D                               PROFESSIONAL ENGLISH              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course aims to enhance the English language proficiency of engineering students in professional 
contexts. Through a combination of theoretical knowledge and practical exercises, students will develop 
their skills in technical writing, oral communication, presentation, and critical thinking. The course will 
focus on various aspects of professional communication, including report writing, academic writing, 
technical presentations, and effective communication in interdisciplinary teams. Additionally, students 
will engage with real-world engineering scenarios to apply language skills in practical contexts. 
 
Course Objectives: Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Develop proficiency in technical writing for engineering reports, research proposals, and 
documentation. 
2. Enhance oral communication skills for effective presentations, meetings, and discussions and 
thereby improve their employability skills. 
3. Improve critical thinking and analytical skills through the evaluation of technical information and 
arguments. 
4. Foster teamwork, collaboration skills in interdisciplinary engineering projects. 
5. Develop awareness of cultural and linguistic diversity in professional settings. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Pronunciation: Course techniques include recordings, partner work, group activities and one-on-one 
instructor feedback. Your speech will become clearer, more fluent and easier to understand. You'll 
improve your enunciation of individual sounds, intonation, stress patterns, pace and pausing.  
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Speaking Professionally: You’ll build greater confidence through individual work, group interaction and 
feedback from your peers and instructor. To express yourself more clearly and concisely, whether you are 
speaking in impromptu situations or making well-planned Presentations. Focus on language that 
familiarizes you with the use of English in everyday situations and contexts. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Refine Your Grammar: Express yourself more accurately and eloquently by improving your English 
Grammar. You’ll get the strong foundation you need to write and speak more clearly, precisely and 
persuasively. You’ll explore the relationship between words in sentences, and analyse structure and 
meaning, clarify common problem points and improve punctuation. You’ll have the opportunity to 
practice with your peers and get helpful feedback. You’ll also learn what resources are best for ongoing 
grammar help. You’ll apply them to produce effective, concise written work with newfound confidence. 
You’ll express yourself more clearly and persuasively by using varied, well-structured sentences and 
placing content more strategically. You’ll also develop editing skills to rid your work of errors.  
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Essentials – Professional Writing Improve your written English for personal, professional and academic 
purposes. You’ll refine your sentence structure, punctuation and verb tenses, and eliminate the most 
common errors that confuse readers. You’ll enhance your writing style. Develop editing skills that help 
you revise your work.  Lectures, discussions, e-learning tools and assignments will help you develop the 
communication skills you’ll need in today’s business environment.  
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                                9 Hrs 
 
You’ll be equipped to create power packed Power Point Presentations. Be in better stead to introducing 
yourself. To know the nuances that goes into the presenting of information, and articulating information. 
Know how to make an impressive introduction. To imbibe Life Skills that is necessary to lead a fruitful 
and a fulfilling life. 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course the student will be able: 
1. To understand the importance of Professional English in work place and learn the correct 
pronunciation and delivery of speech. 
2. To read technical proposals properly and make them to write good technical reports. 
3. To achieve better comprehending skills, vocabulary and professional speaking skills. 
4. To learn and identify the Common Errors in Writing and Speaking. 
5. Acquire digital competence, employment and workplace communication skills. 
Text Books: 
1. Technical Communication: Process and Product by Sharon J. Gerson and Steven M. Gerson 
2. Engineering Communication: From Principles to Practice by David Ingre, C. O'Brien 
3. Technical Writing Basics: A Guide to Style and Form by Brian R. Holloway 
Reference Books: 
1. The Encyclopaedia Britannica" - A comprehensive general encyclopaedia covering a wide range 
of topics. 
2. The Oxford English Dictionary (OED)" - A comprehensive dictionary of the English language. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1202A                                             FRENCH                        L T P C 
                                                                                                                                            3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to French by intensively studying important aspects of pronunciation, 
vocabulary, grammar and sentence formation through practice sets and audio visual lessons. It introduces 
the workings and sounds of the language and provides the necessary tools to enable students to make 
sentences from scratch. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To train the students to know about France, French culture and basics 
2. To teach them to learn basic grammar and vocabulary. 
3. To train them to learn tenses in French 
4. To train them to talk about their daily routine 
5. To train them to converse in French in day-to-day scenarios 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                       9 Hrs 
Introduction to France and its regions - French alphabets and numbers, countries and nationality 
Grammaire – Verbs  – s’appeler, être, avoir, definite and indefinite articles 
Communication – Greetings, Self Introduction 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Basic vocabulary, colours, months and days 
Grammaire - Verbes - Conjugation : Present tense (ER, IR, RE ending verbs) – Adjective possesive 
Communication – Talk about family and friends, date, time etc. 
   
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Hobbies, interests and daily routine 
Grammaire – Irregular verbs – Releflexive verbs - Future proche  
Communication – Talking about hobbies and interests                  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Vocabulary of places and  transport  
Grammaire – Pertinent verbs, adjective demonstrative, past tense, propositions 
Communication – Narrating an incident or story                   
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Vocabulary of food, services, money 
Grammaire – Negation, Verbs – acheter, manger, payer, articles partitifs. Communication – Accept and 
refuse an invitation, situation in a restaurant                          
Course Outcomes: 
After the course, the students will be able to:  
1. Acquire familiarity in the French alphabet & basic vocabulary 
2. Listen and identify individual sounds of French  
3. Use basic sounds and words while speaking 
 
4. Read and understand simple advertisements, brochures and invitations  
5. Understand and use basic grammar and appropriate vocabulary in completing language tasks 
Text Books:  
1. Grammaire Progressive du Français, CLÉ International, 2010. 
2. Saison 1, Marie-Noëlle Cocton et al, Didier, 2014. 
3. Cosmopolite A1 - Nathalie Hirschsprung, Tony Tricot 
Reference Books: 
1. Préparation à l’examen du DELF A1 – Hachette 
2. Réussir le DELF A1 – Bruno Girardeau 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT1202B                                                GERMAN                          L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: German Language Training  
Course Objectives: 
1. Importance of German Language in Global prospective 
2. To develop Reading skills for Basic Level 
3. German writing skills, particularly emails & short messages  
4. To develop basic German Speaking skills in order to meet the General activities 
5. Listening practise to understand German Accent of the Native German Speakers 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
GUTEN TAG!: Saying hello and goodbye, introducing oneself and others, talking  about oneself and 
others, numbers 1-20, spelling words and names, talking about countries and languages, the alphabet, first  
verbs in present tense, how to ask questions, useful terms and expressions                 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                       9 Hrs 
FRUENDE, KOLLEGEN UND ICH: Talking about hobbies, days of the week, numbers from 20 on 
up, months and seasons in the year, talking about work and job, definite article, personal pronouns, the 
verbs to have (haben) and to be (sein), plurals of nouns. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs   
IN DER STADT: Getting around a town and asking for the way, giving directions, indefinite articles, 
negation with kein, imperative forms.        
UNIT- IV                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs  
GUTEN APPETIT!: Talking about food, planning a trip to the grocery store, food and meals and talking 
about it, verbs that require the accusative       
UNIT- V                                                                                                                                       9 Hrs 
TAG FÜR TAG: Telling and understanding time, talking about one's family, possessive articles (mein, 
dein) and modal auxiliaries (müssen, können, wollen).                       
Course Outcomes: 
1. Basic Reading skills 
2. Basic Writing skills with basic Grammar 
3. Speaking skills and to do advance German Course 
4. Understanding basic German for Daily Communication  
5. Awareness of European Union and opportunities in Europe 
Text Books:  
1. A1-German Level- Netzwerk A1 Book- Prescribed by International Institute- Goethe Institute 
Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMTT2501                             PRINCIPLES OF TRAUMA CARE 
                                                                                                                                                           L T P C 
                                                                                                          
3  1 0  4 
Total Hours 60 
 
Course Description :This course provides a comprehensive introduction to Emergency Medical Services 
(EMS) and its critical role in healthcare. It covers the history and evolution of EMS, current trends, and 
the specialized field of emergency medicine, including the roles and responsibilities of emergency 
medical technicians (EMTs). The course also emphasizes the importance of pre-hospital transport, 
including the types of ambulances and communication systems, and the procedures for effective triage in 
emergency situations. This foundational course is designed to equip students with the knowledge and 
 
skills necessary for effective practice in EMS and emergency healthcare settings. 
Course objectives : At the end of the course the students will acquire knowledge of the following 
Aspects 
1. Understand the historical development of EMS and identify current trends shaping the future of 
emergency medical services. 
2. Analyze the classification, organization, and structure of hospitals, and the role of medical records 
and electronic medical records in patient care. 
3. Demonstrate the process of health assessment, including the collection of health history and 
performing physical examination methods such as inspection, palpation, percussion, and 
auscultation. 
4. Evaluate the roles and responsibilities associated with inter-facility transport, including types of 
ambulances,  communication systems, and safety measures during transport. 
5. Apply the principles of triage in emergency situations, including mass triage, under-triage, over
triage, and the use of color coding for severity segregation and documentation. 
UNIT 1 : EMS                                                                                                                                        12 Hours 
Introduction, History of EMS and current trends, Understanding of emergency medicine [The specialty, its 
pros and cons], Roles and responsibilities of emergency medical technician. Medico legal issues
Abandonment, sexual harassment, consent and referral, Negligence, DNR order. 
Required components of EMS system, existing EMS in India. 
 
UNIT -2 : Hospital and Patient Orientation                                                                                  12 Hours 
History, classification, organization and structure, Door way to the hospital department,Medical records, 
Electronic medical records, Medico-legal issues 
 
UNIT-3: Health Assessment                                                                                                           12 Hours 
Purpose, Process of health assessment, Health history, Physical examination methods-Inspection, Palpation, 
Percussion, Auscultation.Preparation for examination-Patient and unit. 
UNIT-4: Pre Hospital transport: Roles and Responsibilities                                                     12 Hours 
Inter facility transport, Types of ambulance, Ambulance-communication system, communication 
equipment, safety during transport.Sequence of procedure for the emergency call-preparation and scene 
management, Confidentiality, Documentation. 
UNIT-5: Triage: Basic and Advance                                                                                             12 Hours 
Types of triage-Mass,Under,Over, Colour coding.Severity -segregation ,Importance and Documentation. 
Course outcome: After completion of the course studnts will be able to 
1. Recall the historical milestones and current trends in EMS 
2. Explain the structure, classification, and organization of hospitals, and the significance of medical 
 
records 
3. Conduct comprehensive health assessments using various physical examination techniques 
4. Assess and implement effective strategies for pre-hospital transport, ensuring safety and proper 
communication 
5. Critically evaluate triage methods and apply appropriate triage techniques in emergency scenarios 
to ensure optimal patient care 
Recommended Text Books: 
 Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and bartlett 
publishers. 
 Tintinalli Emergency Medicine Manual – 8 th Edition – RITA K.CYDULKA, DAVID M.CLINE   
O. JOHN MA 
 Handbook of Medical Record Technology - Jacob MA 
 Adams Emergency Medicine ,Adams, Erick D.Barton-Saunders Elsevier 
Reference Books: 
1. Emergency Medicine -2nd Edition, Plantz ,Wipfler - Lippincott Williams and Wilkins Rosen 
2. Emergency Medicine - 7 th Edition Marx,Hock berger walls, Adams-Mosby Elsevier 
3. Principles and Practice of Management by LM Prasad 
 
EMTT2502                   INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL PRACTICES  
                                                                              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                       3  1 0  4 
Total Hours 60 
Course Description: This course provides a detailed exploration of essential clinical procedures and 
assessments in emergency medical services, focusing on the measurement of vital signs, respiratory 
procedures, intermediate airway management, cardiovascular procedures, and gastrointestinal 
interventions. Students will learn practical skills and theoretical knowledge necessary for effective patient 
care in emergency settings. The curriculum emphasizes hands-on practice, critical thinking, and 
adherence to medical protocols to ensure proficiency in life-saving techniques and comprehensive patient 
management 
 
Course Objectives : At the end of the course the students will acquire knowledge of the following 
Aspects: 
1. Accurately assess and monitor vital signs, including pulse, respiratory rate, temperature, and blood 
pressure, to evaluate a patient's immediate health status. 
2. Demonstrate proficiency in the use of intermediate airway devices and respiratory monitoring 
techniques, including esophageal obturator airway, combitube, laryngeal mask airway, CO2 
monitoring, pulse oximetry, and oxygen therapy. 
3.  Perform and interpret various cardiovascular procedures, such as cardiac monitoring, central venous 
monitoring, cardiac pacing, defibrillation, cardioversion, and pericardiocentesis, to manage and 
stabilize cardiac patients. 
4. Execute the procedures for cannulating the umbilical vein and intraosseous infusion, understanding 
the indications, techniques, potential complications, and appropriate drug administration. 
5. Conduct gastrointestinal procedures, including the insertion of a nasogastric (NG) tube, gastric lavage, 
and poison decontamination, to manage upper GI poisoning and other gastrointestinal emergencies 
effectively. 
UNIT-1 : Vital Sign Measurement                                                                                               12 Hours 
Pulse assessment, Respiratory assessment, Temperature, Blood pressure, Respiratory Procedure : ET
inubation, extubation, Tracheostomy , Suctioning-oral, Naso, Inter costal drainage[ICD], Needle 
thoracocentesis, Mechanical ventilation 
UNIT-2: Intermediate Airways                                                                                                 12 Hours 
Esophageal obturator airway, Combitube, Laryngeal mask airway ,Co2 monitoring,Pulse oximeter 
Oxygen therapy, Nebulizer 
UNIT-3:Cardiovascular Procedures                                                                                         12 Hours 
Cardiac monitoring, Central venous monitoring, Cardiac pacing, Defibrillation 
Cardio version, Pericardiocentesis 
UNIT-4: Vascular Access in Emergency and Neonatal care                                                      12 Hours                                                                                                                         
 
Cannulating Umbilical vein: Indication ,Procedure, Drugs, complication  
Intraosseous Infusion: Indication, Procedure, Drugs through umbilical vein,Complication. 
UNIT-5:Gastrointestinal Procedures                                                                                      12 Hours 
Insertion of NG tube, Gastric lavage, Upper GI poisoning, Poison decontamination tube-whole bowel 
inclusion. 
Course Outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to 
1. Identify the correct techniques and steps for measuring vital signs and performing basic and 
advanced respiratory procedures 
2. Explain the functions and uses of intermediate airway devices and the importance of accurate 
respiratory procedures 
3. Demonstrate the ability to perform cardiovascular procedures and use appropriate monitoring 
equipment in real world scenarios 
4. Evaluate the indications and procedures for umbilical vein cannulation and intraosseous infusion, 
identifying potential complications and appropriate interventions 
5. Critically assess gastrointestinal procedures and implement the best practices for managing upper 
GI poisoning and performing poison decontamination 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Clinical procedures in emergency medicine-Robert and Hedges-Saunders. 
2. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and Bartlett 
publishers. 
3. Rosens Emergency Medicine – 7th  Edition Marx, Hock berger walls, Adams-Mosby Elsevier 
Reference Books: 
1. Tintinalli Emergency Medicine Manual – 8th Edition – RITA K.CYDULKA, DAVID M.CLINE 
O. JOHN MA 
2. Adams Emergency Medicine ,Adams, Erick D.Barton-Saunders Elsevier A Manual on clinical 
surgery , 7th  Edition S Das - Dr.S.Das 
 
EMTT2503                                              PARAMEDIC TRAINING-I  
                                                                                                                                                           L T P C 
                                                                                                      
3  1 0  4 
Total Hours 60 
 
Course Description:  This course offers an in-depth exploration of critical emergency medical 
procedures and patient management strategies. Covering a broad spectrum of urgent medical situations, 
including wounds, bleeding, shock, cerebrovascular accidents (strokes), seizures, faints, extreme body 
temperatures, diabetes-related emergencies, and asphyxia, the curriculum is designed to equip students 
with the necessary knowledge and skills to handle emergencies effectively. Through theoretical 
understanding and practical applications, students will learn to assess, diagnose, and provide immediate 
care, ensuring improved patient outcomes. 
Course Objectives : At the end of the course the students will acquire knowledge of the following 
Aspects: 
1. Understand the types and sources of bleeding, factors affecting bleeding severity, and appropriate 
wound care techniques to manage and monitor patients effectively. 
2. Recognize the causes and pathophysiology of different types of shock, including hypovolemic, septic, 
and anaphylactic shock, and apply early intervention strategies to mitigate shock's effects. 
3. Comprehend the pathophysiology, signs, and symptoms of strokes and seizures, and develop skills to 
manage these conditions, focusing on airway management, positioning, and medication 
administration. 
4. Identify and treat conditions related to abnormal body temperatures, such as hypothermia, 
hyperthermia, heat stroke, and malignant hyperthermia, ensuring patient stabilization and recovery. 
5. Manage diabetes-related emergencies (hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and diabetic ketoacidosis) and 
understand the causes, immediate response, and management of asphyxia, including airway 
maintenance and oxygen therapy. 
COURSE CONTENT  
UNIT-1: Wounds and Bleeding                                                                                                      12 Hours 
The types of bleeding, their source and main complications, Blood volume, the factors affecting bleeding 
and indications of severity, The complications of constriction bandages and tourniquets,The need for 
aseptic procedures, Guidelines for the safe management of foreign bodies: indications for in situ retention 
and removal, The importance of adequate examination to detect concealed bleeding,The dangers of severe 
blood loss and the priorities when managing multi organ system injury,The need for careful monitoring for 
the evidence for recurrent bleeding,The common medical terms associated with wounds and bleeding 
The particular characteristics required for wound dressing. 
Shock: The causes of shock, relevant history as well as common signs and symptoms, the categories of 
patient especially at risk of shock, The basic pathophysiology of hypovolemic shock, the body’s response 
to illness and injury which results in shock,Septic shock, Anaphylaxis, The role of early recognition of 
 
actual or potential shock in limiting its effect, the nature of shock, that shock is not a disease in itself and 
that it develops due to the body’s responses to illness or trauma. 
UNIT 2 : Cerebrovascular Accident -Stroke                                                                                     12 Hours 
The basic pathophysiology of stroke, The history, clinical signs and symptoms commonly associated with 
stroke, The special difficulties experienced by stroke patients; especially in communication, mobility and 
anxiety. The vital importance where the patient is unconscious, of effective airway management, correct 
positioning and oxygenation, Importance of early recognition of stroke, Role of investigations and 
understanding urgency for thrombolysis if indicated. 
Seizure : The history of clinical signs and symptoms associated with seizure, The importance of limiting 
intervention during seizure to air way management, oxygenation and prevention of injury,The medicines 
commonly carried by an epileptic which may identify him/her as a sufferer,The cause and effect of 
infantile convulsions,The importance of cooling an infant following a convulsion,Drugs usually used in 
management of seizures. 
Faints: The students should be able to:Demonstrate the management techniques for a faint 
The causes of faint, The history, clinical signs and symptoms associated with faints, The correct 
positioning of the patient to restore normal blood supply to the brain, The importance of airway 
management for unconscious patients, The normally brief introduction of a faint and that delayed recovery 
could mean a more serious condition. 
UNIT-3 : Extremes of Body Temperature                                                                                        12 Hours 
Hypothermia, Hyperthermia, Heat stroke, Malignant Hyperthermia 
UNIT -4: Diabetic                                                                                                                           12 Hours 
Hypoglycemia, Hyperglycemia, Diabetic Ketoacidosis, Common types of Insulin Regimens Required 
Fluid Management 
 
UNIT 5: Asphyxia                                                                                                                           12 Hours 
The five main causes of asphyxia, Immediate response and the management of asphyxia, 
Supplemental oxygen therapy at a high concentration, obstruction of the airway, The importance of 
positioning in maintenance of the airway,The need to make frequent careful observation of respiratory 
function to prevent asphyxia, Burns. 
 
Course Outcome : After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Identify the various types of bleeding, shock, stroke, seizures, temperature extremes, diabetes 
emergencies, and asphyxia, and their basic characteristics and terminologies 
2. Explain the pathophysiology, signs, and symptoms associated with these conditions and the 
importance of early recognition and intervention 
3. Demonstrate proper techniques for wound care, shock management, stroke and seizure response, 
 
temperature regulation, diabetes crisis intervention, and asphyxia management in simulated 
scenarios 
4. Assess the severity of different medical emergencies, determine the appropriate medical 
procedures, and analyse patient responses to interventions. 
5. Evaluate the effectiveness of emergency medical interventions, refine patient care strategies based 
on outcomes, and ensure adherence to best practices for improving patient survival and recovery 
rates. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine – A comprehensive study guide – 9 th Edition Rosen’s 
Emergency Medicine – concepts and clinical Practice – 7 th Edition. 
2. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and bartlett 
publishers. 
Reference Books: 
1. Basic Life support - Provider Manual,American Heart Association (2016)  
2.  American Red cross Basic Life support for Health care Providers Handbook,American Red Cross 
(2010)   
3. Adams Emergency Medicine ,Adams, Erick D.Barton-Saunders Elsevier
 
 EMTL2501                                                  CLINICAL SKILLS - I   
 
              L T  P  C 
150 Hours                                                                                                                                0  0 12 6 
                                                                     
     
Course Description: This course provides comprehensive training in critical emergency and clinical care 
techniques, focusing on airway management, vascular access, life support protocols, therapeutic 
interventions, and patient monitoring. Through theoretical knowledge and hands-on practice, students will 
develop the skills necessary to manage a  
Wide range of medical emergencies, from basic life support to advanced trauma care. The course is 
designed for healthcare professionals seeking to enhance their proficiency in life-saving procedures and 
patient care. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the principles, indications, and techniques of airway management and vascular access. 
2. Develop the skills required to perform advanced vascular access and urinary catheterization 
procedures. 
3. Gain proficiency in using monitoring and therapeutic devices for patient care. 
4. Master the protocols and techniques for life support and resuscitation in various age groups. 
5. Apply the principles of fluid resuscitation and electrical therapy in clinical scenarios. 
 
Unit 1: Airway Management and Access Devices                                                                    30 Hours 
Combitube, Endotracheal Intubation (ET-Intubation), Laryngeal Mask Airway (LMA) 
Intraosseous Infusion, Intravenous Cannulation 
 
Unit 2: Advanced Vascular Access and Urinary Catheterization                                         30 Hours 
Central Venous Access,  Suprapubic Catheterisation 
 
Unit 3: Monitoring and Therapeutic Devices                                                                          30 Hours  
Thermometer, BP Apparatus, Nebulizer,  Pulse Oximetry 
 
Unit 4: Life Support and Resuscitation Protocols                                                                  30 Hours 
BLS (Basic Life Support),ACLS (Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support),PALS (Pediatric Advanced 
Life Support),ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support) 
 
Unit 5: Fluid and Electrical Therapy                                                                                      30 Hours   
Fluid Resuscitation, Electrical Therapy 
 
 
Course Outcome : After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the principles, indications, and techniques of airway management 
and vascular access devices. 
2. Perform advanced vascular access and urinary catheterization procedures accurately and manage 
associated complications. 
3. Utilize monitoring and therapeutic devices effectively to gather and interpret patient data, 
integrating it into comprehensive care plans. 
4. Implement life support and resuscitation protocols for different age groups, evaluating and 
adjusting interventions based on patient response. 
5. Develop and execute effective treatment plans incorporating fluid resuscitation and electrical 
therapy, tailored to specific clinical scenarios. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Textbook of Critical Care by Jean-Louis Vincent, Edward Abraham, Patrick Kochanek, Frederick A. 
Moore, Mitchell P. Fink 
 2. Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support Provider Manual (ACLS) by American Heart Association 
Reference Books: 
1. Miller’s Anesthesia by Ronald D. Miller, Manuel Pardo 
2. Roberts and Hedges’ Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care by James R. 
Roberts, Jerris R. Hedges 
    
 
TAUT2101                                       HEALTH AND WELLNESS                                   L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The course is designed to help students to learn more about human health. This course helps to 
understand how current health knowledge helps to make future human beings even stronger and healthier. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To help understand the importance of a healthy lifestyle 
2. To familiarize students about physical and mental health 
3. To create awareness of various life style related diseases 
4. To understand the multiple dimensions of health and wellness, including physical, mental, 
emotional, social, and environmental aspects 
5. To Equip students with the knowledge and skills to develop, implement, and maintain healthy 
lifestyle practices 
UNIT-I                    9 Hrs 
Define and differentiate health and wellness, Importance of health and wellness, Basic concepts of 
genetics, including genes, DNA, chromosomes, and inheritance patterns. Genetic factors affecting 
macronutrient (carbohydrates, proteins, and fats) digestion. Genetic variations associated with 
micronutrient (vitamins and minerals) digestion; malnutrition, under nutrition and over nutrition 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Brief overview of Body systems – Skeletal system, Muscular system, Circulatory System, Lymphatic 
system, Cardiovascular system, Respiratory system, Nervous system (Central nervous system, Peripheral 
nervous system, Somatic and Autonomic nervous systems), Digestive system, Urinary system, Endocrine 
system, Reproductive system, Integumentary system 
 UNIT-III                                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Sedentary lifestyle and its risk of disease, Lifestyle Disease and its Management, Factors affecting mental 
health - Stress, anxiety, and depression, Identification of suicidal tendencies, Substance abuse (Drugs, 
Cigarette, Alcohol), de-addiction, counselling and rehabilitation. Four Vital signs- Pulse rate, Respiratory 
rate, Blood pressure, Body temperature, other measurements-Body mass index, Waist-Hip Ratio, Basal 
Metabolic Rate  
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                           9 Hrs 
Risk factors and Pathology of the following Diseases and their Management –  - Diabetes - Hypertension - Coronary Heart Disease - Obesity - Osteoporosis 
 - Osteoarthritis  - Rheumatoid-arthritis  - Cancers (Blood, Breast, Brain, Lung, Liver and Kidney) - Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) - Pain (including Low Back pain) 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                          9 Hrs 
Introduction to Functional Foods; Nutrients and Bioactive Compounds in Functional Foods; Functional 
Foods for Cardiovascular Health, Weight Management, Immune Function, Cognitive Health, Chronic 
Disease Prevention; Yoga and its importance in Health and Wellness 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon successful competition of the course the student would be able to -  
1. Understand the relationship between fitness and wellness  
2. Gain knowledge regarding various aspects and its practical implication for Wellbeing. 
3. Learn about behavior change theories and strategies for promoting healthy habits such as exercise, 
stress management, and nutrition 
4. Study techniques for setting realistic health goals, creating wellness plans, and overcoming 
barriers to maintaining a healthy lifestyle. 
5. Learn about the principles of a balanced diet, regular physical activity, mental health management, 
social relationships, and environmental factors that influence health 
Text Books: 
1. Physical Activity and Health by Claude Bouchard, Steven N. Blair, William L. Haskell. 
2. Mental Health Workbook by Emily Attached & Marzia Fernandez, 2021. 
3. Mental Health Workbook for Women: Exercises to Transform Negative Thoughts and Improve 
WellBeing by Nashay Lorick, 2022. 
Reference Books:  
1. Lifestyle Diseases: Lifestyle Disease Management, by C. Nyambichu & Jeff Lumiri, 2018. 
2. Physical Activity and Mental Health by Angela Clow & Sarah Edmunds, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201                              COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT                           L T P C 
                                                                                                                                               3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course provides degree-seeking students with an array of opportunities to engage in an immersive 
community service-learning experience. It further helps to understand the resources, optimize the 
recourses in future days, and address the gaps in the communities. 
Course Objectives:  
Students undergoing this course are expected to:  
1. Understand community issues, needs, problems, strengths and recourses  
2. Demonstrate the ability to work with a diverse population   
3. Formulate more precise personal and professional life goals  
4. Demonstrate the ability to communicate effectively and collaborate with institutions and public  
5. Demonstrate the ability to take initiative, follow directions, lead, and solve problems  
UNIT-I Social Structure                                                                                                5 Hrs  
Concept of Society; Community; Association and Institution; Individual and Society; Social Groups- 
Meaning, Characteristics and Classification; Social Process; Social Change; Structure and Characteristics 
of urban, rural and tribal communities.  
UNIT-II Social Organisation and Disorganisation                                                       5 Hrs  
 Social Organisation- meaning, elements and types; Voluntary Associations; Social System- definition, 
types and roles; Social Control- meaning, aims and process of social control; Social norms, morals and 
values; Social Disorganisation- definition, causes, control and planning.  
UNIT-III Social Problems and Welfare State                                                               8 Hrs  
Social Problems- Poverty, Housing, food supply, illiteracy, Prostitution, dowry, child labour, child abuse, 
delinquency, crime, substance abuse, HIV/ AIDS, Covid-19; Venerable Group- elderly, handicapped, 
minority and another marginal group; Fundamental rights of individual, women and children, NITI 
Aayog, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, and Role of Local Bodies for transformation; Corporate 
Social Responsibility; Social Work.  
Proposed Field activities: Field visit- Interaction with Local Self Government, Visit of Gram Panchayat 
& Staff, Socio-Economic Survey (5 hours/ one day). 
 
UNIT-IV Communication Strategies and Community Engagement                                18 Hrs  
 
Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC); Focused Group Discussion; SWOT analysis; 
Participatory Learning Action.   
Proposed Field activities: Meeting, Mobilizing, Transect Walk, Identification of Natural Leaders, 
Timeline, Mapping, Case Study, Documentation; Outreach- Special Camp Viz., Health Education, 
Medical Camp, Environment Protection, Sustainability, Technology & Innovation, Nutrition, Swachh 
Bharat (15 Hours/ 4 days).  
UNIT-V Sustainable Development Goals 2023                                                9 Hrs  
Millennium Development Goals; Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 2030- 17 Goals; SDG Pyramid; 
Localizing SDGs; Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP).  
Proposed Field activities: Mapping the activities with SDG 2030 (6 Hours/ 1 day).  
Course Outcomes:   
By the end of the course, students should able to:  
1. Understand and apply the concept related to community and social structure.  
2. Develop the ability to involve and work with the social system.  
3. Understand various social problems emerging in society and solve them.  
4. Apply SBCC tools and SWOT analysis.   
5. Appreciate Sustainable Development Goals and contribute beyond SDG 2030.  
Text Books:  
1. Krishna Kant Singh & Ram Shankar Singh, (2011), Social Work and Community Development. 
2. Makara Rumley, (2020), Modern-Day Strategies for Community Engagement: How to Effectively 
Build Bridges Between People and the Bottom Line. 
Reference Books: 
1. Hall, B. L., Tandon, R. & Tremblay, C. (2015). Strengthening Community University Research 
Partnerships: Global Perspectives.  
2. http://unescochaircbrsr.org/unesco/pdf/UNESCO%20Book%20Web_with%20BookCovers_Aug2
02015_FINAL.pdf 
3. GUNi (Ed.). (2014). Knowledge, Engagement and Higher Education: Contributing to Social 
Change (Higher Education in the World 5). Hampshire (UK)/New York (USA): Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
4. UNESCO Chair in Community Based Research & Social Responsibility in Higher Education 
(2015). Institutionalizing Community University Research Partnerships: A User’s Manual.  
http://unescochair-cbrsr.org/unesco/pdf/CURP_Guidelines.pdf 
 
5. Vallaeys, F. (2014). University Social Responsibility: A Mature and Responsible Definition. In 
GUNi (Ed.), Knowledge, Engagement and Higher Education: Contributing to Social Change 
(Higher Education in the World 5) (pp. 88-96). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2202                              CLINICAL NUTRITION                                                L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
Upon completion of the course, students will be prepared to apply their knowledge of clinical nutrition to 
promote health and manage diseases effectively, contributing to multidisciplinary healthcare teams. This 
course is essential for healthcare professionals, nutritionists, dietitians, and anyone interested in 
understanding the role of nutrition in clinical care and wellness promotion. 
 
Course Objectives:  
To enable the students to: 
1. Develop proficiency in conducting comprehensive nutritional assessments using various methods 
such as dietary recall, biochemical tests, and anthropometric measurements. 
2. Understand the impact of diet on the prevention, management, and progression of chronic diseases 
commonly encountered in clinical practice, including diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and 
obesity. 
3. Acquire skills in designing individualized nutrition plans tailored to specific patient needs and 
health conditions across different life stages (e.g., pediatric, geriatric, maternal). 
4. Evaluate ethical issues related to nutritional counseling, respecting cultural dietary practices, and 
providing evidence-based dietary recommendations within clinical settings. 
5. Critically appraise current research and controversies in clinical nutrition, integrating evidence
based guidelines into decision-making processes to optimize patient outcomes. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs                                     
Introduction to nutrition - Food as source of nutrients, functions of food, definition of nutrition, 
nutrients & energy, adequate, optimum & good nutrition, malnutrition, Effect of cooking & heat 
processing on the nutritive value of foods, role of nutrition in prior pregnancy, during pregnancy, during 
lactation, in adolescence, Fitness, Athletics & Sports 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Food guide - Basic five food groups How to use food guide (according to R.D.A.)  Interrelationship 
between nutrition & health: - Visible symptoms of good health, Use of food in body - Digestion, 
Absorption, transport & utilization, Role of fibres in human nutrition. malnutrition, Protein energy 
malnutrition.  
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Biomolecules as a nutrient: Carbohydrates: Functions, classification, food sources, storage in body. Fats 
& oils: composition, saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, classification, food sources, function of fats. 
 
Proteins - composition, sources, essential & non-essential amino acids, functions, Protein deficiency.  
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Water minerals and Vitamins: Water - as a nutrient, function, sources, requirement, water balance & 
effect of deficiency.  Minerals - macro & micronutrients. - Functions, sources. Bioavailability and 
deficiency of Calcium, Iron, Iodine, Sodium & Potassium, Vitamins (water & fat soluble) - definition, 
classification & functions.  
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Role of nutrients in disease management: Importance of nutrition in kidney and liver diseases with 
respect to their nutritional value. Case study- diabetes, cancer, Osteoporosis, Heart related diseases, role 
of Antioxidants as a nutrient in disease control. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, the student shall be able to  
1. Demonstrate proficiency in conducting thorough nutritional assessments using a variety of methods, 
interpreting results, and applying findings to develop dietary recommendations. 
2. Apply knowledge of macro and micronutrients, dietary supplements, and hydration to design effective 
nutrition plans for individuals with diverse health needs and conditions. 
3. Implement dietary interventions that contribute to the prevention, management, and improvement of 
chronic diseases, integrating nutritional strategies into comprehensive healthcare plans. 
4. Evaluate and address ethical considerations in nutritional counseling, respecting cultural diversity and 
individual preferences while adhering to professional standards and evidence-based practices. 
5. Critically analyze current research literature in clinical nutrition, utilizing evidence-based guidelines 
to make informed decisions and enhance patient outcomes in clinical settings. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Kathleen ML and Escott S. Krause's Food, Nutrition and Diet Therapy, 9thedn, W.B. Saunders 
Company Pennsylvania, 2000. 
2. Davidson S, Passmore R, Breck JFT. Human Nutrition and Dietetics, The English Language Book 
Society and Churchill Livingston, 1975. 
Reference Books: 
1. Thomas B. Manual of Dietetic Practice. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, London, 1988. 
2. Robinson CH. Normal and Therapeutic Nutrition. Oxford Publishing Co, Bombay, 1972. 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2203      EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND MENTAL HEALTH             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                3  0 0  3 
 
Course Description: 
 
This course will explore the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health. Students will 
learn about the importance of emotional intelligence in promoting positive mental health, and will 
develop skills in recognizing and regulating emotions, managing stress, and building resilience. The 
course will cover topics such as emotional intelligence theories, emotional regulation strategies, 
mindfulness, self-compassion, and the impact of emotions on mental health. 
Course Objectives: 
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand the role of emotional intelligence in mental health 
2. Develop skills in recognizing and regulating emotions 
3. Understand the impact of stress on mental health and develop strategies for managing stress 
4. Understand the importance of self-compassion in promoting positive mental health 
5. Develop critical thinking and analytical skills in relation to emotional intelligence and mental 
health 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                        9 Hrs 
Introduction to Emotional Intelligence and Mental Health; Definition and history of emotional 
intelligence, the role of emotional intelligence in mental health, Professional organizations and ethical 
codes related to emotional intelligence 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Theoretical Perspectives on Emotional Intelligence; Ability model of emotional intelligence, Trait model 
of emotional intelligence, Mixed model of emotional intelligence, Mindfulness and Mental Health, 
Mindfulness and Mental Health. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Stress and Mental Health, Resilience and Mental Health; The impact of stress on mental health, Stress 
management techniques (e.g., relaxation techniques, time management, exercise) Definition and benefits 
of resilience, Factors that contribute to resilience, Building resilience in oneself and others. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Self-Compassion and Mental Health, Emotions and Relationships; Definition and benefits of self
compassion, Practice of self-compassion, Relationship between self-compassion and mental health, 
Emotions and Relationships 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Emotional Intelligence in the Workplace, Ethics and Emotional Intelligence; Emotional intelligence and 
job performance, the role of emotional intelligence in leadership, Emotional intelligence training in the 
 
workplace, Ethical issues related to emotional intelligence, Professional codes and standards related to 
emotional intelligence 
Final Project Presentations 
Students will present their final projects, which may include research papers, case studies, or other 
projects related to emotional intelligence and mental health. 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Able to provide an overview of emotional intelligence and mental health 
2. Will understand the importance of emotional intelligence  
3. The impact of stress on mental health, Stress management techniques 
4. Relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health 
5. Understand the importance of Emotional Intelligence in the workplace.  
Text Books: 
1. Neff, K. (2011). Self-compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind. 
HarperCollins. 
2. Goleman, D. (2007). Emotional Intelligence (10th ed.). Bantam Books. 
Reference Books:  
1. Covey, Stephen R., author. (2020). The 7 habits of highly effective people: powerful   lessons in 
personal change. New York :Simon & Schuster. 
2. Tolle, E. (2016). The power of now: A guide to spiritual enlightenment. Yellow Kite. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2204                                               HUMAN RIGHTS             L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course offers a comprehensive introduction to the field of human rights, exploring the historical 
development, philosophical foundations, and contemporary issues surrounding the protection and 
promotion of human rights globally. Students will engage with key concepts, major international human 
rights instruments, and the roles of various actors in the human rights landscape.  
Course Objectives: 
This course is intended to prepare the students to  
1. Know Human Rights, its need importance, and kind of rights 
2. Understand the Human Rights of vulnerable groups 
3. Identify and analyze key international human rights documents and treaties. 
4. Know about the institutions enforcing the Human Rights 
5. Understand the violations of Human Rights and the safeguards available to citizens. 
UNIT-I Concept of Human Rights – Indian and International Perspectives               5 Hrs   
a. Evolution of Human Rights 
b. Definitions under Indian and International documents 
UNIT-II Broad classification of Human Rights and Relevant Constitutional Provisions. - 
                        11 Hrs 
a. Right to Life, Liberty and Dignity  b. Right to Equality 
c. Right against Exploitation   d. Cultural and Educational Rights 
e. Economic Rights    f. Political Rights 
g. Social Rights 
UNIT-III Human Rights of Women and Children                 11 Hrs 
a) Social Practice and Constitutional Safeguards 
b) Female Foeticide and Infanticide 
c) Physical assault and harassment 
d) Domestic violence 
e) Conditions of Working Women 
UNIT-IV Institutions for Implementation                     9 Hrs 
a. Human Rights Commission 
b. Judiciary 
UNIT-V Violations and Redressal                      9 Hrs 
a. Violation by State 
b. Violation by Individuals 
 
c. nuclear weapons, bio war and terrorism 
d. Safeguards. 
Course Outcomes: 
 After the successful completion of this course the students will be able to  
1. Know about Human Rights, its need importance and kind of rights 
2. Understand the Human Rights of vulnerable groups 
3. Know about the institutions enforcing the Human Rights 
4. Understand the violations of Human Rights and the safeguards available to citizens. 
5. Develop critical thinking and analytical skills by examining case studies and current events. 
Text Books: 
1. Human Rights in India: Historical, Social and Political Perspectives (Law in India) Hardcover – 
Illustrated by Chiranjivi J. Nirmal (Author) 
2. History of Human Rights, Narrated by Andrea Giordani 
Reference Books: 
1. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights- UNO publication 
2. Making Sense of Human Rights- by James Nickel. 
3. The Idea of Natural Rights- by Brian Tierney. 
4. The Law of Peoples- by John Rawls. 
5. On Human Rights. - by James Griffin. 
6. Human Rights: Contemporary Issues by V.K. Ahuja 
7. Human Rights, M Girija, S Chand Edu tech Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2205                                                INDUSTRY 4.0                                    L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Industry 4.0 aims to the “smart” and connected production systems that are designed to sense, 
predict, and interact with the physical world, so as to make decisions that support production in real-time. 
In manufacturing, it can increase productivity, energy efficiency, and sustainability. 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to make students: 
1. To impart basic idea in Industry 4.0.  
2. To provide students with good depth of knowledge of designing Industrial 4.0 Systems for various 
application.  
3. To learn the artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques/ tools in health care. 
4.  To understand the bigdata technology and its applications in health care. 
5. To learn the design and analysis of Industry 4.0 systems for healthcare applications. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Introduction: Introduction, Historical Context, General framework, Application areas, Dissemination of 
Industry 4.0 and the disciplines that contribute to its development, Artificial intelligence, The Internet of 
Things and Industrial Internet of Things, Additive manufacturing, Robotization and automation, Current 
situation of Industry 4.0.  
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Cyber Physical System: Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), Architecture of CPS- 
Components, Data science and technology for CPS, Emerging applications in CPS in different fields. 
Case study: Application of CPS in health care domain. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning: Artificial Intelligence: Artificial Intelligence (AI) – What 
& Why? History of AI- Foundations of AI, the AI Environment, Application Domains and Tools. 
Machine Learning- Introduction–Definition–Types of Machine Learning–Supervised, Unsupervised, 
Reinforcement Learning–Algorithms for Machine Learning–Problems solved by Machine Learning
Applications areas of Machine Learning in Health care. 
 UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Big Data & Cloud Computing: What is Big Data, Evolution of Big Data, sources of Big Data? 
Characteristics of Big Data Vs – Big Data Myths- Data Discovery-Traditional Approach, Big Data 
Technology: Big Data Technology Process– Applications of Bigdata in Healthcare. 
Cloud Computing: Need– Definition – Types of Cloud-Types of Services– SaaS, PaaS, Iaas  
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                   9 Hrs 
Impact of Industry 4.0 on Healthcare Industry: An introduction Discover how Industry 4.0 is 
 
impacting and transforming the Healthcare Industry including self-diagnosis systems for patients, real
time diagnosis, 3D printed organs and Internet-of-Medical Things (IOMT).  
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of the course, student will be able to:  
1. Understand the basic concepts of Industry 4.0 and the other related fields 
2. Analyze, design and develop systems to solve the Engineering problems by integrating thermal, 
design and manufacturing Domains.  
3. Understand the various artificial intelligence and machine learning tools in health care domain.  
4. Apply bigdata technology in health care applications. 
5. Apply the learned Engineering knowledge for the Development of society and self. 
Text Books: 
1. Jean-Claude André, ―Industry 4.0, Wiley- ISTE, July 2019, ISBN: 781786304827, 2019. 
2. Diego Galar Pascual, Pasquale Daponte, Uday Kumar, ―Handbook of Industry 4.0 and SMART 
Systems, Taylor and Francis,2020  
Reference Books: 
1. P. Kaliraj, T. Devi, BigDataApplicationsinIndustry4.0, 2022, ISBN9781032008110, CRC Press, 
Taylor & Francis Group 
2. P. Kaliraj, Devi Thirupathi, “Artificial Intelligence Theory, Models and Applications”, Auerbach 
Publications, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis group, 2021. 
3. Ethem Alpaydin, “Introduction to Machine Learning”, Third Edition, MIT Press, 2014. 
4. P. Kaliraj, T. Devi, Industry 4.0 and Education: Transformative Technology and Applications, 
2022, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2206                              MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY                                  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The purpose of this course is to develop a student’s understanding and use of hospital and medical 
terminology. There is a focus on understanding the terns commonly used to identify the cause and effects 
of disease conditions. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the associate medical terms with specific body systems. 
2. To identify and interpret diagnostic and symptomatic terms related to the diseases specific to each 
body system. 
3. To describe designated diagnostic testing procedures (laboratory, x-ray, surgical, pharmacy, etc.). 
4. To Enable students to understand, use, and correctly pronounce a wide range of medical terms. 
5. To Prepare students to effectively communicate with healthcare professionals and patients using 
accurate medical terminology. 
UNIT-I                                           9 Hrs 
Basics of medical terminology, Specialties in a Hospital, The Human body in health and disease 
UNIT-II                                            9 Hrs 
The Skeletal System, The Muscular System, The lymphatic and immune systems 
UNIT-III                                            9 Hrs 
The Respiratory System, The Circulatory System, The Digestive System, The Urinary System  
 UNIT-IV                                             9 Hrs 
The Nervous system, Special senses - Eyes and Ears, Skin - The Integumentary system 
UNIT-V                                             9 Hrs 
The Endocrine system, The Reproductive System, Diagnostic procedures, Nuclear Medicine and 
Pharmacology 
Course Outcomes:  
Upon successful completion of the course student would be –  
1. Able to Identify and interpret complex medical terms by breaking them into their component word 
parts in order to decipher their meaning. 
2. Able to understand common diseases and disorders of the body systems 
3. Able to identify diagnostic tools and techniques for the common diseases and disorders of the 
human body  
4. Able to interpret medical records, lab reports, and other documentation to ensure clear and precise 
communication within healthcare teams and with patients 
 
5. Able to learn the roots, prefixes, and suffixes that form medical terms, as well as the terminology 
related to various body systems, diseases, procedures, and treatments. Students will be able to 
deconstruct complex terms into their component parts to understand their meanings. 
Text Books: 
1. Medical Terminology for Health Professions, 7th Edition by Ann Ehrlich; Carol L Schroeder, 
ISBN 13: 9781111543297, Published by Delmar Cengage Learning (2013) 
2. Workbook for Ehrlich/Schroeder's Medical Terminology for Health Professions, 7th by Carol 
Schroeder, Ann Ehrlich Published by Delmar Cengage Learning; 7th edition, 2012, ISBN-13  :  
978-1111543280  
Reference Books: 
1. Quick and Easy Medical Terminology - With Access by Peggy C. Leonard, ISBN13: 978
0323595995, 9th Edition 
2. Medical Terminology Systems: A Body Systems Approach - With Access by Barbara A. Gylys, 
ISBN13: 978-0803658677, 8th Edition 
3. Understanding Medical Terminology by Agnes C. Frenay, ISBN13: 978-0697140586, 9th Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2207                                  SOCIAL NETWORK ANALYSIS                              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
A thorough introduction to Social Network Analysis (SNA), an interdisciplinary topic that studies the 
connections and interactions between people, groups, and things in various social contexts, is provided in 
this course. Students will receive a broad understanding of the core ideas, approaches and uses of SNA in 
a variety of disciplines. The course will cover data gathering methods, network visualization, fundamental 
network metrics, sophisticated network ideas and practical SNA implementations. Students will learn the 
skills necessary to evaluate social networks and gain useful insights from intricate network data through 
hands-on exercises. 
Course Objectives: 
1. To introduce students to the foundational concepts and historical background of Social Network 
Analysis (SNA). 
2. To familiarize students with the basic building blocks of social networks, including nodes and 
edges and different types of social networks (e.g., online, offline, professional, friendship). 
3. To provide students with an understanding of key network measures such as degree centrality, 
betweenness centrality, clustering coefficients and network density. 
4. To demonstrate real-world applications of SNA, such as social network mining, influence and 
opinion dynamics, social network marketing and cybersecurity. 
5. To equip students with practical skills for analyzing and interpreting social network data. 
UNIT-I                                     9 Hrs 
Overview of Social Network Analysis: Definition, history and key concepts. Nodes and Edges: 
Understanding the basic building blocks of social networks. Types of Social Networks: Exploring 
different types of social networks (e.g., online, offline, professional, friendship).Importance and 
Applications of SNA: How SNA is used in various fields (e.g., Engineering, Sociology, Psychology, 
Marketing and Business). 
UNIT-II                            9 Hrs 
Data Collection Methods: Techniques for gathering social network data (e.g., surveys, interviews, online 
platforms). Data Representation: Different formats for representing network data (e.g., adjacency matrix, 
edge list).Network Visualization: Introduction to visualization tools for nd interpreting network 
structures. 
UNIT-III                         9 Hrs 
Degree Centrality: Identifying influential nodes based on their connections. Betweenness Centrality: 
 
Understanding nodes that act as bridges in the network. Clustering Coefficients: Analyzing the degree of 
interconnectedness within local neighbourhoods. Network Density: Assessing the overall connectivity of 
a social network. 
 
UNIT-IV                         9 Hrs 
Small World Phenomenon: Exploring the "six degrees of separation" concept. Homophily and Social 
Influence: Understanding how social networks shape individuals' behaviour and beliefs. Network 
Resilience and Robustness: Examining the impact of node removal on the network's stability. Network 
Motifs: Identifying recurring patterns in complex social networks. 
UNIT-V                        9 Hrs 
Social Network Mining: Using SNA to extract meaningful patterns and insights from large-scale 
networks. Influence and Opinion Dynamics: Analyzing how information spreads through social networks. 
Social Network Marketing: Leveraging SNA for targeted marketing campaigns and product promotion. 
Online Social Networks and Cyber security: Understanding network-based threats and vulnerabilities. 
Course Outcomes: 
By the end of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Comprehend the foundational concepts, methodologies and tools of Social Network Analysis. 
2. Extract meaningful insights from social network data, identifying influential nodes and 
understanding network dynamics. 
3. Apply SNA concepts to real-world challenges in areas such as marketing, cyber security and 
social dynamics. 
4. Utilize SNA techniques to inform decision-making processes. 
5. Conduct and interpret SNA in various domains effectively. 
Text Books: 
1. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications" by S. K. Garg, 2019, Wiley India. 
2. Introduction to Social Network Analysis: Concepts, Methods and Applications" by R. K. Singh, 2020, 
Springer India. 
Reference Books: 
1. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications" by Stanley Wasserman, Katherine Faust (1994, 
Cambridge University Press) 
2. Analyzing Social Networks" by Stephen P. Borgatti, Martin G. Everett, Jeffrey C. Johnson (2013, 
SAGE Publications) 
3. Networks, Crowds and Markets: Reasoning About a Highly Connected World" by David Easley, Jon 
Kleinberg (2010, Cambridge University Press). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2208  ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE & BIOMEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT  
 L T P C 
                                                                                                                                               3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course covers antibiotics and drug resistance, including mechanisms and trends, and explores 
biomedical waste management, focusing on segregation, treatment, and disposal. Emphasis is placed on 
antimicrobial stewardship and modern technologies for handling biomedical waste and ensuring 
environmental safety. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand the history, mechanisms, and types of antibiotic resistance. 
2. Analyze trends in drug resistance and actions to combat it. 
3. Evaluate the consequences of antibiotic resistance and implement antimicrobial stewardship. 
4. Learn principles and practices of biomedical waste management and environmental safety. 
5. Utilize modern technologies and personal protective equipment for effective biomedical waste 
handling. 
UNIT-I                                             9 Hrs 
Antibiotics: Antibiotic Resistance, History of antibiotics, How resistance happens and spreads, Types of 
resistance- intrinsic, acquired, passive.   
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Drug resistance - I: Trends in drug resistance, Actions to fight resistance, Bacterial persistence, 
Antibiotic sensitivity   
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Drug resistance - II: Consequences of antibiotic resistance, Antimicrobial Stewardship – Barriers and 
opportunities, tools and models in hospitals.    
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Biomedical waste management and environmental safety  - I: Definition of Biomedical, Waste, Waste 
minimization, BMW – Segregation, collection, transportation, treatment and disposal (including colour 
coding).   
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Biomedical waste management and environmental safety - II: Liquid BMW, Radioactive waste, 
Metals / Chemicals / Drug waste, BMW Management & methods of disinfection, Modern Technology for 
 
Handling BMW, Use of Personal protective equipment (PPE), Monitoring & controlling cross-infection 
(Protective devices).   
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Explain antibiotic resistance, its history, and mechanisms. 
2. Analyse trends and strategies in drug resistance management. 
3. Assess the consequences of antibiotic resistance and implement antimicrobial stewardship. 
4. Understand principles and practices of biomedical waste management. 
5. Apply modern technologies and PPE for effective biomedical waste handling and infection control. 
Text Books: 
1. "Antibiotics: Actions, Origins, Resistance" by Christopher Walsh 
2. "Antimicrobial Stewardship: Principles and Practice" by Matthew Laundy, Lynda A. Sisson, and 
Matthew Dryden. 
Reference Books: 
1. "Biomedical Waste Management in Hospitals: A Manual for Health Professionals" by Sushrut S. 
N. H.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2209                      BEHAVIOR CHANGE COMMUNICATION                  L T P C 
                                                                                                                                          3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course introduces students to the fundamentals of behavioral theory, research and interventions in 
health education and promotion. The course will expose students to a wide range of theories, basic 
statistics and the use of open-source software in the analysis and evaluation of health aspects at the 
community level in a holistic manner. Furthermore, students will understand the concept of intersectoral 
and multidisciplinary coordination in order to improve data visualization in health education and 
promotion through the use of appropriate statistical tools. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the behavioral, social and cultural factors associated with health and illness. 
2. To explore factors that influence and barriers to practicing health behavior and changing poor 
health habits across age groups. 
3. To understand the structure of society, the role of society and various types of communication and 
identify the role of society, community, health education and communication in health. 
4. To describe the methods, models, tools and processes used in understanding health behavior 
change, health education and promotion. 
5. To apply relevant social and behavioral theories to diagnose and understand individual, social 
network, organizational, community and policymaker behaviors associated with the planning, 
implementation, evaluation and maintenance of community-based primary health care programs. 
 
UNIT-I                          5 Hrs 
Introduction to Social and Health Behavioral Health, Importance of social and behavioral factors in 
health, Historical perspectives on population and diseases.  
 
UNIT-II                        8 Hrs 
Health behavior: role of behavior factors in disease and disorders, Health behavior, health habits, Illness 
behavior, Practicing and changing health behavior, Barrier to modify poor health behavior, intervening 
with children, adolescents, adults and at risk, social determinants of Health, Changing health habits.  
 
UNIT-III                       12 Hrs 
Basic concepts of society, community, and family, Society: features and types, Concept of culture: 
characteristics, elements, variability, social institutions: marriage and family. Working with communities, 
Community: Definition, concept of community participation, Benefits of community participation, Health 
communication, Communication: Definition, scope and requirements, Types of communication, 
Components of communication, Communication stages, Common communication approach, Methods of 
 
communication, Characteristics of effective communication, Barriers of effective communication. 
 UNIT-IV                     10 Hrs 
Health Behavior Models, Social Epidemiology, Health belief model, Theory of planned behavior, 
Transtheoretical Model and change process, Social network theory, Diffusion of innovation, Social 
reaction to diseases, Comparative health cultures, Health disparities. 
UNIT-V                       10 Hrs 
Introduction Social network analysis, Basic of social network analysis, Introduction to open-source 
software and classification in health approaches, Introduction to Node XL software, Install, data visualize, 
data analysis and application among community level for policy-maker behaviors associated with the 
planning, implementation, evaluation, and maintenance of community-based health programs. 
Course Outcomes:  
End of the course completion student would be  
1. Understand behavioral, social and cultural factors associated with health and illness. 
2. Develop strategies to address barriers to practicing healthy behaviors and changing poor health 
habits across age groups. 
3. Analyze the structure of society and various types of communication and identify the role of 
society, community, health education and communication in health. 
4. Apply appropriate methods, models, tools and processes for understanding health behavior 
change, health education and promotion. 
5. Utilize SNA tools, strategies and social and behavioral theories to diagnose and understand 
individual, social network, organizational, community and policymaker behaviors in community
based primary health care programs. 
Text Books: 
1. Essentials of health behavior: Social and behavioral theory in public health by Mark Edberg 
( Jones and Bartlett publishers 
2. Mahajan BK. Methods in Bio-statistics. Jaypee Brothers, Medical Publishers (p) Ltd., G16, EMCA 
House, 23/23B, Ansari Road, Daryaganj, Post Box: 7193, New Delhi 110 002, India, 1991. List 
Current Essential Reference 
Reference Books: 
1. Foster and Anderson: Medical Anthropology, Wiley, New York 
2. Anderson & Taylor, Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society. 
3. Neubeck and Glasberg, Selected Material from Sociology: Diversity, Conflict, and 
Change. 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201A                               DISABILITY MANAGEMENT                               L T P C 
                                                                                                                                          3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
Disability Management course is designed to provide students with an in-depth understanding of the 
strategies, practices, and policies essential for supporting individuals with disabilities in various settings. 
This course covers the principles and techniques of disability management, focusing on creating inclusive 
environments in the workplace, educational institutions, and the community.     
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the social, medical, and legal aspects of disability. 
2. Evaluate the impact of disability on individuals and society. 
3. Analyze policies and regulations related to disability management. 
4. Develop strategies for supporting individuals with disabilities in various contexts. 
5. Promote inclusivity and diversity in the workplace and community. 
UNIT-I Introduction to Disability Management                                                                 9 Hrs 
Definition and classification of disabilities, Historical perspectives on disability, Disability as a social 
construct, Medical aspects of Disability, Common medical conditions leading to disability, Assessing 
functional limitations and impairments 
UNIT- II Social and Psychological Aspects of Disability                                                    9 Hrs 
The impact of disability on quality of life, Stigma and discrimination, Coping and psychological 
adjustment to disability, Role of healthcare professionals in disability management, Psychological 
Interventions and Chronic Health Disorders; Therapies, Pharmacological Interventions, Individual 
Therapy, Relaxation, Stress Management and exercise, Social Support Interventions, Help on the Internet, 
Support Groups  
UNIT- III Legal and Ethical Framework                                                                             9 Hrs 
Disability rights and legislation, Equal opportunity and anti-discrimination laws, Ethical considerations in 
disability management, Emerging technologies and their impact on disability management, the future of 
disability policy and practice 
UNIT- IV Workplace Disability Management                                                                     9 Hrs 
Reasonable accommodation and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Return-to-work programs 
Workplace diversity and inclusion, Current Issues  
UNIT- V Community and Public Health Approach                                                             9 Hrs 
Community resources and services for individuals with disabilities, Accessibility and universal design 
Disability awareness and advocacy, Analysis of real-life cases in disability management, Developing 
disability management plans, Accommodation strategies and their implementation,  Current Issues and 
Future Trends 
 
 
Course Outcomes:  
By the end of the course, the students would be able to; 
1. Understand various aspects and causes of disability. 
2. Get insight on the efficacy of interventions and therapies to deal disability.  
3. Assess the ethical and legal consideration of disability. 
4. Acknowledge the importance of ADA act and it implementation in workplace. 
5. Know and participate in various community based disability programs. 
Text Books: 
1. Preventing chronic disease: a vital investment. WHO global report. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2005 (http://www.who.int/chp/chronic_disease_ report/en, accessed 15 May 2008).  
2. Singh D. Transforming chronic care: evidence about improving care for people with long-term 
conditions. Birmingham, University of Birmingham, 2005.  
Reference Books:  
1. Chronic diseases [web site]. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 
(http://www.who.int/topics/chronic_disease/en, accessed 15 May 2008). 
2. National Center for Health Statistics definitions: health condition [web site]. Atlanta, United 
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201B                                     DISASTER MANAGEMENT                               L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Disaster Management course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive understanding of 
the principles, strategies, and practices essential for effectively managing disasters. This course explores 
the various types of natural and human-made disasters, their causes, impacts, and the processes involved 
in mitigating, preparing for, responding to, and recovering from such events. 
Course Objectives: 
The main objectives of this course are to: 
1. To impart knowledge and concepts of disaster, disaster management and disaster risk 
reduction. 
2. To enhance the students understanding on Hazard Vulnerability and Risk Analysis 
3. To develop positive attitude towards practical response to different stages of disaster  
4. To management by adopting advance technology and sustainable development. 
5. To ensure disaster response skills in assessment, analysis, intervention and evaluation in the 
Practice of reducing disaster risk. 
UNIT- I                                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Concepts of Disaster and Vulnerability                                                                                          - Hazards and disasters - Concepts, vulnerability and risks - Hazard and disaster type- Natural, Water-related, Pandemic and Human induced hazards and 
disasters - Causes and impacts of disasters- Impact on natural eco-system; physical, psychological and 
social impact - Disaster and financial resilience - GIS and Remote Sensing 
Disaster vulnerability profile of India - Specific to geographical regions and states (as per 
regional significance). 
UNIT- II                                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Disasters Intervention Practices - Disaster Management Cycle-Rescue, relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction, prevention, mitigation 
and preparedness - Disaster risk reduction (ORR) - community based ORR, Institutions concerned with safety, 
Disaster mitigation and construction techniques as per Indian Standard - Early warning systems - Trauma and Stress management - First-aid and emergency procedures 
 
Awareness generation strategies for the community on safe practices in disaster (as per 
regional significance) 
UNIT- III                                                                                                                                                            9 Hrs 
Disaster Management 
Components of disasters management - Preparedness of rescue & relief, mitigation, 
rehabilitation & reconstruction 
Institutional framework of disaster management in India (NDMA-SDMA-DDMA, 
NDRF, Civic volunteers, NIDM), 
Phases of disasters/risk management and post-disaster responses Compensation and 
insurance 
UNIT- IV                                                                                                                      9 Hrs 
Applications of remote sensing & GIS in disaster management - Capacity building for disaster/damage mitigation (structural and non-structural measures). - Disaster risk reduction strategies and National Disaster Management Guidelines - Disaster Management Act-2005 - Regional issues as per regional requirement/ university can take minimum two topics as per 
High Powered Committee. 
UNIT- V                                                                                                                             9 Hrs 
Practical exposure requirements: Field work/ community visit and Vulnerability Mapping, 
Safe community planning and implementation, Mock Drill/ Regional issues as per 
region/university 
Course Outcomes: 
Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to: 
1. Define and analysis factors contributing to disasters, threats to development, life and nature 
2. Demonstrate, and practice disaster risk reduction activities towards sustainable development 
3. Formulate, organize and assess disaster risk reduction  
4. Plan activities according to the nature of disasters and factors of vulnerabilities 
5. Able to mitigate disaster and educate communities 
Mode of Evaluation: Continuous Assessment Test, Quizzes, Assignments, Multiple choice 
questions test, field work report, project report. 
Text Books: 
1. “Disaster Management” by Harsh K. Gupta 
2. “Disaster Management: Future Challenges and Opportunities” by Jagbir Singh 
Reference Books: 
1. Singh, R. (2017), "Disaster Management Guidelines for Earthquakes, Landslides, Avalanches 
and Tsunami". Horizon Press Publications 
 
2. Taimpo (2016), "Disaster Management and Preparedness" CRC Press Publications 
3. Nidhi, G.D. (2014), "Disaster Management Preparedness". CBS Publications Pvt. Ltd. 
4. Gupta, A. K., Nair, S.S., Shiraz, A. and Dey, S.(2013), "Flood Disaster Risk Management- 
CBS Publications Pvt. Ltd. 
5. Singh, R. (2016), "Disaster Management Guidelines for Natural Disasters" Oxford 
University Press Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201C                    HUMAN VALUES & PROFESSIONAL ETHICS              L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
The Human Values and Professional Ethics course aims to explore the fundamental principles that 
underpin ethical behavior and moral reasoning. This course provides students with an understanding of 
core human values and ethical frameworks, fostering the development of personal integrity, social 
responsibility, and professional ethics. Through this course, students will engage with key philosophical 
theories, contemporary ethical issues, and the application of ethical principles in various contexts. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Understand the need, guidelines, content, and process for Value Education. 
2.  Understand the concept of harmony within oneself. 
3. Understand the values in human relationships. 
4. Understand the interconnectedness and mutual fulfillment among the four orders of nature. 
5. Understand the implications of a holistic understanding of harmony on professional ethics. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs 
Introduction – Need, guidelines, content and process for Value Education Value Education  
 Understanding the need, basic guidelines, content and process for Value Education 
 Self-exploration what is it? Its content and process; “Natural acceptance” and Experiential 
Validation as the mechanism for self-exploration. 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Understanding harmony in the human being- Harmony in myself! 
 Understanding human being as a coexistence of the sentient I and the material body 
 Understanding the harmony of I with the body: Sanyam and Swasthya; correct appraisal of 
physical needs, meaning of prosperity in detail. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Understanding harmony in the Family and Society- Harmony in Human relationship 
 Understanding values in human – 
 Human relationship; meaning of Nyaya and program for its fulfillment to ensure Ubhay- trupti; 
Trust (Vishwas) and Respect (Samman) as the foundational values of relationship 
 Visualizing a universal harmonious order in society-Undivided Society (Akhand Samaj), 
Universal Order (Sarvabhaum Vyawastha) from family to world family. 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Understanding Harmony in Nature; Coexistence 
 Interconnectedness and mutual fulfillment among the four orders of nature- recyclability and self
regulation in nature. 
 
 Holistic perception of harmony at all levels of existence. 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Implications of the above Holistic understanding of harmony on professional ethics 
 Definitiveness of Ethical Human Conduct 
 Basis for Humanistic Education, Humanistic Constitution and Humanistic Universal Order 
 Competence in professional ethics 
 Ability to utilize the professional competence for augmenting universal human order 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of this course, the learners will be able to:  
1. Students will be able to explain the need, guidelines, content, and process for Value Education. 
2. Students will demonstrate an understanding of the harmony within oneself, identifying the sentient 
self and the material body. 
3. They will be capable of visualizing and explaining the concept of a universal harmonious order 
from the family level to the global level. 
4. They will recognize and explain the importance of recyclability and self-regulation in nature, and 
develop a holistic view of harmony at all levels of existence. 
5. They will be able to define and advocate for ethical human conduct in their professional lives. 
Text Books: 
1. "Value Education and Professional Ethics"** by R.S. Naagarazan 
2. "Human Values and Professional Ethics"** by Rishabh Anand 
 Reference Books: 
1. Mind and Body: Holistic Approach"by Dr. V.K. Sharma 
2. "Integrative Body-Mind Training"** by Yi-Yuan Tang 
3. Understanding Harmony in the Family and Society 
4. "Human Values and Professional Ethics"** by Jayashree Suresh 
5. "Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research"** by Caroline Whitbeck 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201D              INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL            L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description: 
This course covers infection control principles, antibiotic resistance, and antimicrobial stewardship. 
Students will learn about sterilization, disinfection, hand hygiene, PPE, and managing drug resistance in 
healthcare settings. 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Understand evidence-based infection control practices. 
2. Learn prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections. 
3. Analyse the history and mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. 
4. Examine trends and actions to combat drug resistance. 
5. Implement antimicrobial stewardship in hospitals. 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                                     9 Hrs  
Evidence-based infection control principles and practices: Sterilization, Disinfection, Effective hand 
hygiene, Use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs  
Infection control: Prevention & control of common healthcare-associated infections, Components of an 
effective infection control program, Guidelines (NABH and JCI) for Hospital Infection Control. 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs               
Antibiotics: Antibiotic Resistance, History of antibiotics, How resistance happens and spreads, Types of 
resistance- intrinsic, acquired, passive.   
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                                  9 Hrs 
Drug resistance: Trends in drug resistance, Actions to fight resistance, Bacterial persistence, Antibiotic 
sensitivity.   
UNIT-V                                                                                                                                    9 Hrs 
Consequences of antibiotic resistance, Antimicrobial Stewardship – Barriers and opportunities, tools and 
models in hospitals   
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, students should be able to: 
1. Apply effective infection control practices. 
2. Prevent and manage healthcare-associated infections. 
3. Explain the history and spread of antibiotic resistance. 
4. Identify and combat drug resistance trends. 
5. Implement antimicrobial stewardship strategies. 
Text Books: 
 
1. "Infection Prevention and Control: Theory and Practice for Healthcare Professionals" by Debbie 
Weston 
2. "Antibiotics: Actions, Origins, Resistance" by Christopher Walsh 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Antimicrobial Stewardship: Principles and Practice" by Matthew Laundy, Lynda A. Sisson, and 
Matthew Dryden 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TAUT2201E                            NSS & YOUTH DEVELOPMENT            L T P C 
                                                                                                                                              3  0 0  3 
Course Description:  
The National Service Scheme (NSS) aims to develop students' personalities through community service 
and national integration. It encourages students to work towards societal development, fostering a sense 
of responsibility and civic duty. The program bridges academic learning and real-life experiences, 
promoting overall personal growth and social awareness among youth. 
Course Objectives:  
1. To explain the nature, functions and importance of NSS.  
2. To explain the role of NSS in the context of youth, community and voluntary service.  
3. To develop the necessary communication and soft skills.  
4. To appreciate the importance of health, hygiene and sanitation for a healthy nation.  
5. To develop the concept and skills of managing environment issues and disaster management 
UNIT-I                      9 Hrs 
Youth Development Program in India and Role of Youth Leaders National Youth Policy; Youth 
Development Program at National Level, State Level, Volunteer Level; Youth centric and youth led 
organizations Role and Importance of youth leadership, Leadership capability and its development. 
 
         UNIT-II                                    9 Hrs 
Meaning type of leader, Qualities, Traits, Role, Importance of a Good Leader Social, psychologic factors 
affecting the youth. 
Life Skills-Self-awareness, Empathy, Effective Communication, Decision Making; Role of Music and Art 
in Youth Development. 
 
          UNIT-III                       9 Hrs  
Basic Features of the Indian Constitution consumer protection act right to Information; Child Protection 
Act, Problems of Aging: Problems Protection of Interests. 
 
         UNIT-IV                         9 Hrs 
Side effects of modern lifestyle and their countermeasures Diet, exercise, sleep in Indian lifestyle; 
Collection, Utilization and Camp; Management of Camps; Biography of Swami Vivekananda. 
 
         UNIT-V                                                 9 Hrs 
Field Work - Rural visit- campaign- rally- Competitions. 
 
 
  Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of this course, the learners will be able to:  
1. Explain the role and functions of NSS.  
2. Appraise the role of NSS volunteers in developing the society as a whole.  
3. Develop the necessary skills of effective communication, leadership and healthy living.  
4. Develop the necessary skills to mitigate disasters and other environmental challenges.  
5. Develop consciousness about personal health and hygiene.  
Text Books: 
1. Communication Skills by N Rao & R P Das (HPH)  
2. Biodiversity, Environment & Disaster Management by Shamna Hussain (Unique Publishers) 
Reference Books: 
1. NSS Manual published by the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, Govt. of India  
2. National Youth Policy Document  
3. National Service Scheme - A Youth Volunteers Programme For Under Graduate Students as Per 
UGC Guidelines by J D S Panwar, A K Jain & B K Rathi (Astral)  
4. Environmental Studies by P K Pandey (Mahaveer Publications) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV SEMESTER
 
EMTT2504                                        PARAMEDIC TRAINING –II 
 L T P C 
                                                                                                                                               3  1 0  4 
 
Total Hours: 60 
Course Description: This course offers comprehensive training in emergency medicine, covering the 
recognition, assessment, and management of critical medical conditions encountered in clinical practice. 
Participants will learn essential skills and knowledge in fluid and electrolyte management, respiratory, 
gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, central nervous system, and genitourinary emergencies, as well as 
hematological and dermatological disorders, and communicable diseases. Through theoretical learning 
and practical application, healthcare professionals will gain proficiency in identifying and treating various 
medical emergencies, administering emergency drugs safely, and delivering optimal patient care in 
critical situation  
Course Objectives:  At the end of the course the students will acquire knowledge of the following 
Aspects: 
1. Develop a comprehensive understanding of fluid administration, electrolyte balance, dehydration, 
and fluid therapy, enabling accurate assessment and management of fluid and electrolyte 
imbalances. 
2. Acquire proficiency in recognizing and managing respiratory emergencies such as COPD, asthma, 
pneumonia, and foreign body obstruction, ensuring prompt intervention and optimal patient 
outcomes. 
3. Develop expertise in assessing and managing cardiovascular emergencies including angina 
pectoris, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmia, and congestive heart failure, enhancing the 
ability to provide timely and effective cardiac care. 
4. Gain competence in assessing and managing central nervous system emergencies such as stroke, 
seizure, and head injury, enabling accurate diagnosis and appropriate interventions to prevent 
complications and promote neurological recovery. 
5. Acquire proficiency in recognizing and managing hematological disorders including anemia, 
leukemia, and thrombocytopenia, and develop competence in administering emergency drugs . 
Course Plan  
UNIT 1:                                                                                                                                       12 Hours 
Fluid and Electrolytes: Fluid Administration, Formulas, Dehydration, Fluid therapy 
Electrolyte Imbalance : Hyponatremia and Hypernatremia, Hypokalemia and Hyperkalemia, 
Hypocalcemia and Hypercalcemia 
Acid Base Imbalance: Metabolic Acidosis and Alkalosis, Respiratory Acidosis and Alkalosis 
UNIT 2:                                                                                                                                                                 12 Hours 
Respiratory Emergencies 
COPD, Asthma, Foreign body obstructionn, Pneumonia, Pulmonary Edema 
Common Medication in Respiratory Problems ( MDI ,Nebulizer ) 
 
Gastro-Intestinal Emergencies 
Abdominal Pain, Peptic ulcer diseases, Cholecystitis, Hepatitis, Pancreatitis, Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm 
Bowel Obstruction, Hernias, GI Bleeding 
UNIT 3                                                                                                                                                                     12 Hours 
Cardiovascular Emergencies 
Angina Pectoris, MI, Thrombolytic Therapy, Congestive Cardiac Failure, Hypertensive Emergencies 
Cardiac Arrhythmia, Acute coronary syndrome, 12 Lead ECG, Heart Block 
Central Nervous System Emergencies 
Meningitis, Stroke, Seizure, Status Epilepticus, Syncope, Head Injury, Haemorrhage 
Genito Urinary Emergencies 
Renal Failure, Urolithiasis, Urinary Tract Infection, Hematuria 
UNIT 4                                                                                                                                                                    12 Hours 
Hematological Disorders:    
RBC Disorders:  Anemia, Leukemia, Thrombocytopenia 
Dermatological Disorders:Viral Infections: Varicella, Herpes Zoster, Allergic Reactions 
Communicable Disease:Causative organism, Mode of Transmission, Sign and Symptoms, Prophylaxis , 
Investigation and common treatment of following diseases :  Hepatitis, Malaria, Tuberculosis, Dengue, 
AIDS, Typhoid, Tetanus, Chicken Pox, Measles, Category III Infection, Control Measures, Precaution 
during Transfer. 
UNIT 5                                                                                                                                      12 Hours 
Emergency Drugs 
Drug Introduction, Indication, Contra – Indication, Side Effects and Routes of Administration with doses 
of following drugs: 
Adrenaline, Aspirin, Atropine, Amiodarone, Beta blockers, Calcium channel blockers, Dopamine, 
Dobutamine, Diazepam, Dextrose, Morphine Sulphate, Lidocaine, Mannitol,Vasopressors,Phenytoin, 
Sodium Bicarbonate, Hydrocortisone 
 
Course Outcome: After completion of the course, the student will be able to: 
1. Understand the principles of fluid and electrolyte balance, demonstrating knowledge of fluid 
administration, electrolyte imbalances, and dehydration management. 
2. Participants will apply their knowledge of respiratory emergencies to assess and manage conditions 
such as COPD, asthma, and pneumonia, demonstrating the ability to intervene effectively in 
critical respiratory situations. 
3. Analyze and Evaluate Cardiovascular and Emergencies, demonstrating the ability to assess 
conditions like angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, and cardiac arrhythmias, and make informed 
decisions for optimal patient care. 
4. Participants will apply problem-solving skills to assess and manage central nervous system 
 
emergencies, demonstrating competence in addressing conditions such as stroke, seizure, and head 
injury to ensure patient stabilization and neurological recovery. 
5. Integrate their knowledge of hematological disorders with emergency drug administration, 
demonstrating the ability to recognize and manage conditions like anemia, leukemia, and 
thrombocytopenia, while effectively administering emergency drugs to optimize patient outcomes 
in critical medical situations 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine – A comprehensive study guide – 9th Edition Rosen’s 
Emergency Medicine – concepts and clinical Practice – 7 th Edition. 
2. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and Bartlett 
publishers. 
Reference Books: 
1. Basic Life support - Provider Manual, American Heart Association (2016)  
2. American Red cross Basic Life support for Health care Providers Handbook, American Red Cross 
(2010)  
3. Adams Emergency Medicine ,Adams, Erick D.Barton-Sa 
 
 EMTT2505                   TOXICOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                        LTPC 
                                                                                     3 1 0 4  
Total Hours: 60 
Course Description: This course provides a comprehensive exploration of toxicology, focusing on the 
understanding, assessment, and management of various toxic agents encountered in medical emergencies. 
Participants will delve into the definition of poison and the mechanisms by which toxins enter the body, 
as well as the principles of managing poisoned or overdosed patients. Techniques to prevent 
gastrointestinal absorption of toxic compounds and general principles of assessment and management of 
poison and overdose cases will be discussed. Additionally, the course covers the pathophysiologic basis 
of medical toxicology, vital signs assessment, recognition of toxic syndromes, and an organ system 
approach to toxicological emergencies. 
 
Course objectives : At the end of the course the students will acquire knowledge of the following Aspects 
1. Participants will define the term "poison" and comprehend the four ways in which a poison may enter 
the body, establishing a foundational understanding of toxicology principles. 
2. Rrecognize and understand the toxic effects of common analgesics, non-prescription medications, and 
prescription drugs, enabling prompt identification and management of medication-related toxicity. 
3. Participants will identify common household toxins and understand the appropriate techniques for 
managing toxicity caused by disinfectants, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and insecticides, ensuring 
effective management of household poisoning cases. 
4. Developing skills in assessing and managing emergencies resulting from venomous bites and stings, 
including those  caused by snakes, scorpions, spiders, and insects, ensuring timely intervention and 
patient stabilization. 
5. Participants will learn to respond effectively to occupational and environmental toxins, including 
hazmat  incidents, smoke inhalation, carbon monoxide poisoning, and cyanide exposure, emphasizing 
preventive measures and appropriate emergency response protocols. 
 
Course Outcome : After completion of the course students will be able to  
1. Participants will demonstrate understanding by defining the term "poison" and explaining the four 
ways toxins may enter the body, ensuring a foundational comprehension of toxicology principles. 
2. Applying knowledge to recognize and manage toxicity related to common analgesics, non
prescription medications, and prescription drugs, demonstrating the ability to identify medication
related toxicity in clinical scenarios 
3. Analyze and evaluate the identification and management of household toxins, demonstrating the 
ability to assess and manage toxicity caused by disinfectants, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and 
 
insecticides effectively 
4. Participants will apply problem-solving skills to assess and manage emergencies resulting from 
venomous bites and stings, demonstrating competence in implementing appropriate    interventions 
to stabilize patients and prevent further complications. 
5.  Participants will integrate their knowledge to respond effectively to occupational and 
environmental toxins, including hazmat incidents, smoke inhalation, carbon monoxide poisoning, 
and cyanide exposure 
Course Plan 
UNIT 1                                                                                                                                                              12 Hours 
Define the term Poison, The four ways in which a poison may enter body Principles of managing the 
poisoned of over dosed patient Techniques used to prevent gastrointestinal absorption of toxic compounds 
General Principles of Assessment and management of poison and overdose .The pathophysiologic basis 
of medical toxicology, Vital signs, Toxic Syndromes, Organ System Approach 
 
UNIT 2                                                                                                                                                               12 Hours 
Analgesics and Non Prescription Medications : Paracetamol, NSAID,Anti- Histamine 
Prescription Medications : Anti – Diabetic and Hypoglycemic Agents, Anti – Convulsions 
Beta Blockers, Cardiac Glycosides, Opioids, Tricyclic Antidepressants, Toxic Alcohol , Substance and 
drug of abuse 
 
UNIT 3                                                                                                                                                               12 Hours 
House Hold toxins :Disinfectants, Hydrocarbons, Camphor, Caustics, Heavy Metals  
Insecticides – OPC Plant poison 
UNIT 4                                                                                                                                                                12 Hours 
Emergencies due to venomous bites and stings 
Snake bite, Scorpion stings, Spider bite, Dog bite, Bee and wasp stings, Cat bite 
Leech Bite, Human bite 
UNIT 5                                                                                                                                                              12 Hours  
Occupational and Environmental Toxins 
Hazmat Incident Response, Smoke Inhalation, Carbon Monoxide, Cyanide 
 
Recommended Text Books: 
 Paramedic : Pharmacology Applications,( AAOS) Author : BobElling,KristenM.Elling 
 Essentials of Medical Pharmacology K.D.Tripathi -6 th Edition 
 Pharmacology and pharmacotherapeuticsR.S.Satoskar  – Revised 19th Edition 
 Gold Franks Toxicology Emergencies 9 th Edition 
 Rosens Emergency Medicine – 7 Th Edition 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Tintinalli Emergency Medicine 
2. Nancy Caroline Emergency Care in the Streets. 
 
3. Adams Emergency Medicine ,Adams, Erick D.Barton-Saunders Elsevier
 
EMTT2506                                       CRITICAL CARE MANAGEMENT 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         LTPC 
                                                                                     3 1 0 4  
Total Hours: 60 
Course Description: This course provides a comprehensive overview of critical care principles and 
practices, focusing on the management of critically ill patients in intensive care units (ICU). Participants 
will explore the philosophy and principles of critical care, including critical care scoring systems, fluid 
management, electrolyte balance, and acid-base imbalance. Additionally, the course covers transfusion 
therapy, pharmacotherapy considerations, intensive care anesthesia, pain management, nutrition, 
monitoring techniques, ethical and legal considerations in end-of-life care, renal failure management, 
infection control strategies, hepatobiliary diseases, and anti-thrombotic therapy.  
Course Objectives : 
1. Participants will grasp the philosophy and principles underlying critical care, including critical care 
scoring systems, fluid management, and electrolyte balance, ensuring a foundational understanding of 
critical care fundamentals 
2. Developing proficiency in understanding the physiologic effects of anesthesia in critically ill patients, 
airway management, pain management, and the use of muscle relaxants in ICU settings, ensuring optimal 
patient comfort and safety during critical care interventions. 
3. Demonstrate competence in ethical decision-making, understanding medico-legal aspects, withholding 
and withdrawing life support, and organ donation considerations in ICU settings, ensuring adherence to 
ethical principles and legal obligations in patient care. 
4. Participants will develop expertise in infection control and management strategies in critically ill 
patients, including the recognition and treatment of sepsis, community-acquired pneumonia, nosocomial 
infections, and antimicrobial resistance in ICU settings, ensuring effective prevention and management of 
infectious complications. 
5. Participants will acquire comprehensive knowledge and skills in managing hepatobiliary diseases, 
such as acute hepatic failure, cirrhosis, and acute gastrointestinal bleeding, as well as the administration 
of anti-platelet agents and anticoagulants in critically ill patients, ensuring optimal patient outcomes and 
safety in critical care settings. 
 
Course Plan 
UNIT 1 : General Principles                                                                                                 12 Hours                                                                                                                     
Philosophy and Principles of Critical Care, General Principles of Critical care 
Critical Care Scoring, Fluids, Electrolytes and Acid Base imbalance 
Transfusion Therapy: Blood component Administration, Complications of Transfusion 
Pharmacotherapy, Pharmacokinetic Parameters, Pharmacokinetic Considerations, Medication Errors and 
 
Prevention in ICU 
UNIT 2                                                                                                                                     12 Hours  
Intensive Care Anesthesia and Analgesia: Physiologic Effects of Anesthesia in the critical ill,  
Airway Management, Pain Management in Critically ill Patients, Muscle Relaxants in ICU 
Malignant Hyperthermia, Sedative – Hypnotics 
Nutrition : Malnutrition, Nutritional Therapy 
Intensive Care Monitoring: ECG, BP, Intra-Abdominal Pressure Monitoring 
Central Venous catheters, Pulmonary artery catheterization, Cardiac Output 
Pulse Oximetry, Respiratory Mechanics 
UNIT 3                                                                                                                                                                12 Hours 
Ethical, legal and Palliative/End of life care consideration: Ethical Principles 
Medico legal Aspects of decision making, With holding and withdrawing life support 
Organ donation. 
Renal Failure: Non – Dialytic therapy for Acute Renal Failure, Dialytic Therapy for critically ill patient 
Critical Illness in patients with chronic Renal Failure 
UNIT 4                                                                                                                                                             12 Hours 
Infection of Critically ill Patients 
Sepsis, Community Acquired Pneumonia, Nosocomial Pneumonia, Urosepsis, Infective Endocarditis 
Intraabdominal Infections, Urinary Catheter Associated Infection, Antimicrobial Resistance in ICU 
Tetanus, Shingles. 
UNIT 5                                                                                                                                                              12 Hours 
Hepatobiliary Disease : Acute Hepatic Failure, Acute GI bleeding From Portal Hypertension 
Ascites, Cirrhosis, Hepato renal syndrome 
Anti- Thrombotic Therapy: Anti- Platelet Agents, Anti - Coagulants 
 
Course Outcome : After completion of the course students will be able to 
1. Participants understand the philosophy and principles of critical care, including critical care 
scoring systems, fluid management, electrolyte balance, and acid-base imbalance, ensuring a 
foundational understanding of critical care fundamentals. 
2. Participants will apply their knowledge of intensive care anesthesia and analgesia principles to 
effectively manage the physiologic effects of anesthesia, airway management, pain control, and 
muscle relaxation in critically ill patients. 
3. Participants will analyse and evaluate ethical and legal considerations in critical care, 
demonstrating the ability to make informed decisions regarding end-of-life care, organ donation, 
and medico-legal aspects, ensuring adherence to ethical principles and legal obligations in patient 
care. 
 
4. Participants will apply problem-solving skills to recognize and manage infectious complications in 
critically ill patients, including sepsis, pneumonia, and antimicrobial resistance. 
5. Participants will integrate their knowledge of hepatobiliary diseases and anti-thrombotic therapy 
into comprehensive management strategies for critically ill patients. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine – A comphrensive study guide – 9 th Edition Rosen’s Emergency 
Medicine – concepts and clinical Practice – 7 th Edition. 
2. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and bartlett 
publishers. 
Reference Books: 
1. Adams Emergency Medicine ,Adams, Erick D.Barton-Saunders Elsevier                              
2. The ICU Book.Paul L Marino.4 th Edition Lippincott Williams and Wilkins                          
3. Text Book of Critical care - Yatin Mehta - 2 nd Edition 
 
 EMTL2502                                                  CLINICAL SKILLS -II  
                                                                                                                                                         LT P C 
                                                                                                                                                         0 0 20 10                                                                                              
 
Total :300 Hours 
       
Course Description: This comprehensive course covers a wide range of critical emergency and clinical 
care techniques essential for healthcare professionals. Topics include emergency drug administration, 12
lead ECG interpretation, electrolyte imbalance identification, poison and drug overdose management, 
arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis, ECG interpretation, and response to environmental emergencies. 
Through theoretical learning and hands-on practice, participants will develop the skills necessary to 
effectively manage various medical crises and deliver optimal patient care in emergency settings. 
 
Course Objectives 
1. Develop a comprehensive understanding of emergency drug administration, 12-lead ECG 
interpretation, electrolyte imbalance identification, poison and drug overdose management, arterial blood 
gas (ABG) analysis, ECG interpretation, and environmental emergencies, and apply this knowledge 
effectively in clinical practice. 
2. Gain proficiency in administering emergency drugs, interpreting 12-lead ECGs, recognizing 
electrolyte imbalances, managing poison and drug overdoses, analyzing ABGs, interpreting ECGs, and 
responding to environmental emergencies, ensuring timely and appropriate interventions. 
3. Enhance critical thinking skills to analyze emergency situations, assess patient conditions accurately, 
and make informed decisions regarding appropriate interventions in diverse medical scenarios. 
4. Develop effective problem-solving skills to address complex medical emergencies promptly and 
efficiently, ensuring optimal patient outcomes and safety. 
5. Integrate theoretical knowledge with practical skills and adapt approaches to varying emergency 
contexts, demonstrating versatility and efficacy in emergency care delivery. 
Unit 1: Emergency Drugs Administration                                                                              60 Hours    
Introduction to emergency drugs and their indications, Routes of administration: intravenous, 
intramuscular, subcutaneous, oral, and inhalation, Dosage calculation and drug preparation. 
Recognition and management of adverse drug reactions, Communication and teamwork in emergency 
drug administration. 
 
Unit 2: 12-Lead ECG Interpretation                                                                                      60 Hours 
Principles of 12-lead ECG acquisition and electrode placement, Normal ECG waveform and intervals. 
Identification of common cardiac arrhythmia's (e.g., atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia). 
Recognition of conduction abnormalities (e.g., bundle branch blocks, atrioventricular blocks). 
 
Clinical correlations and management strategies based on ECG findings. 
 
Unit 3: Electrolyte Imbalance Recognition and Management                                                60 Hours 
Physiology of electrolytes and their role in maintaining cellular function, Signs, symptoms, and 
diagnostic evaluation of electrolyte imbalances, Treatment modalities for correcting electrolyte 
imbalances (e.g., oral supplements, intravenous electrolyte replacement). Monitoring and management of 
electrolyte imbalances in various clinical settings. Patient education on dietary modifications and lifestyle 
changes to prevent electrolyte imbalances. 
 
Unit 4: Identification and Management of Poison and Drug Overdose                                60 Hours 
Overview of toxicology and common toxic substances, Clinical manifestations and initial management of 
poisoning and drug overdose. Decontamination techniques (e.g., gastric lavage, activated charcoal 
administration).Antidotes and supportive therapies for specific toxins (e.g., naloxone for opioid 
overdose). Coordination of care and follow-up management for patients with poison and drug overdose. 
 
 Unit 5: Environmental Emergencies                                                                                       60 Hours 
Recognition and management of heat-related illnesses (e.g., heat exhaustion, heatstroke), 
Identification and treatment of cold-related injuries (e.g., hypothermia, frostbite). Triage and evacuation 
procedures in mass casualty incidents. Community education on environmental emergency preparedness 
and resilience-building measures. 
 
Course Outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to 
1. Participants will demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of emergency drug administration, 
12-lead ECG interpretation, electrolyte imbalance identification, poison and drug overdose 
management, arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis, and explaining key concepts and principles. 
2. Participants will apply acquired knowledge effectively in practical settings, demonstrating 
proficiency in administering emergency drugs, interpreting 12-lead ECG, recognizing and 
managing electrolyte imbalances, responding to poison and drug overdoses, analysing ABGs, 
interpreting ECGs, and managing environmental emergencies in simulated scenarios. 
3.  Participants will analyze complex emergency situations critically, evaluate patient conditions 
accurately, and make informed decisions regarding appropriate interventions. 
4. Participants will demonstrate effective problem-solving skills by identifying and addressing 
challenges encountered during emergency care, applying knowledge and experience to develop 
innovative solutions, and analysing the potential impacts of decisions on patient care and safety. 
5. Participants will integrate theoretical knowledge with practical skills, adapting approaches to 
varying emergency contexts, and demonstrating creativity in emergency care delivery. They will 
 
develop and implement comprehensive treatment plans tailored to individual patient needs, 
ensuring optimal outcomes and promoting patient well-being. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Emergency Medicine Procedures by Eric Reichman, Robert Simon 
2. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice edited by Ron Walls, Robert 
Hockberger, Marianne Gausche-Hill 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Tintinalli's Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide edited by Judith E. Tintinalli, et al. 
2. Emergency Drug Dosing in Children: A Resuscitation Aid for Paediatric Emergencies by Simon Craig, 
Patrick Daugherty
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
V SEMESTER
 
 EMTT3501                   OBSTETRICS  AND GYNAECOLOGICAL EMERGENCIES 
LTPC 
                                                                                                                                                              3 104 
Total: 60 Hours 
 
                                                                                   
Course Description: This course provides a comprehensive overview of obstetrics, focusing on the 
anatomy and physiology of the female reproductive system, the menstrual cycle, physiological changes 
during pregnancy, and common obstetrical emergencies. Students will learn to diagnose pregnancy, 
differentiate it from other conditions, and conduct antenatal assessments. The course covers 
complications such as hyperemesis gravidarum, antepartum and postpartum hemorrhage, cord prolapse, 
and complications during labor and Cesarean section 
OBJECTIVE: 
1. To analyze the anatomy of the female reproductive system, the menstrual cycle, and physiological 
changes during pregnancy, including normal and preterm labor. 
2. To identify and manage common obstetrical emergencies such as hyperemesis gravidarum, 
antepartum hemorrhage, postpartum hemorrhage, and complications during the third stage of labor. 
3. To evaluate and manage complications during labor, including premature rupture of membranes, 
obstructed labor, malposition, and malpresentation. 
4. To assess and treat trauma in pregnancy, pharmacotherapy, injuries to the birth canal, and 
conditions such as ectopic pregnancy, eclampsia, and preeclampsia. 
5. To perform critical obstetrical procedures, including the management of cardiac arrest in 
pregnancy and conducting general and perimortem caesarean 
Course Plan 
UNIT-1                                                                                                                                        12 Hours 
Anatomy of female reproductive , Menstrual cycle , Physiological changes during pregnancy  
Common obstetrical emergencies, Diagnosis of Pregnancy, Differential diagnosis of pregnancy  
Antenatal assessment of fetal wellbeing, normal labour, preterm labour ,prolong labour  
UNIT-2                                                                                                                                                                  12 Hours 
Hyper emesis gravidarum, Ante partum haemorrhage, Post-partum haemorrhage, Cord prolapse 
Inversion of uterus, Complications of third stage labour 
UNIT-3                                                                                                                                                                 12 Hours 
Premature rupture of membrane,  Obstructed labour, Malposition, Malpresentation 
Medical and surgical illness in pregnancy 
UNIT-4                                                                                                                                                                12 Hours 
Trauma in pregnancy, Pharmacotheraphy in obstetrics ,Injuries to birth canal 
Ectopic pregnancy,eclampsia,pre-eclampsia 
 
 
UNIT-5                                                                                                                                                               12 Hours 
Cardiac arrest in pregnancy, Perimortem caesarean section, General caesarean section 
Course outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to 
1. Recall the anatomy of the female reproductive system and the stages of the menstrual cycle and 
pregnancy physiology 
2. Explain the physiological changes during pregnancy and the importance of antenatal assessment 
for fetal well-being. 
3. Demonstrate the ability to manage common obstetrical emergencies, including antepartum and 
postpartum hemorrhage, and perform critical procedures such as caesarean sections. 
4. Differentiate between normal and complicated labor scenarios, including preterm, prolonged labor, 
and conditions like obstructed labor and Malpresentation. 
5. Assess and formulate appropriate treatment plans for pregnancy-related complications, including 
trauma, pharmacotherapy, and medical conditions such as eclampsia and preeclampsia. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine – A comphrensive study guide – 9 th Edition Rosen’s Emergency 
Medicine – concepts and clinical Practice – 7 th Edition. 
2. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and bartlett 
publishers. 
Reference Books: 
1. Text book of obstertrics 6th edition,Dutta -new central book agency  
2. Mudaliar and menon clinical obstetrics-10th edition 
 
EMTT3502                                   PEDIATRICS  EMERGENCIES                                                                                                                             
                       LTPC 
3 104 
 (Total 60 Hours) 
 
Course Description : This course provides an in-depth exploration of pediatric emergencies, covering 
the anatomical differences between adults and children, neonatal and pediatric resuscitation, and the 
assessment of newborns and pediatric patients. It addresses special conditions such as acidosis, 
diaphragmatic hernia, and sudden infant death syndrome, as well as the management of premature infants 
and gastrointestinal, respiratory, cardiac, and neurological emergencies. Through this course, students 
will develop the skills to effectively assess, diagnose, and manage pediatric emergencies and understand 
the physiological and developmental milestones critical for pediatric care. 
Course objectives: At the end of the course the students will acquire knowledge of the following 
Aspects: 
1. To comprehend the differences in anatomical structures between adults and children, perform 
thorough history taking and physical assessments, and execute neonatal and pediatric resuscitation 
techniques 
2. To identify and manage special pediatric conditions such as acidosis, diaphragmatic hernia, apnea, 
burns, drowning, and sudden infant death syndrome. 
3. .To evaluate and manage the needs of premature infants, handle pediatric fluid derangements, and 
treat gastrointestinal emergencies including vomiting, diarrhea, and GI bleeding. 
4. To diagnose and manage respiratory emergencies such as asthma, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia, 
and cardiac emergencies including shock, Tetralogy of Fallot, syncope, and congestive heart 
failure. 
5. To assess and treat neurological emergencies in children, including seizures, status epilepticus, 
febrile seizures, altered mental status, hypoglycemia, and evaluate developmental milestones 
 
Course Plan 
UNIT 1                                                                                                                                             12 Hours 
Comparative anatomy between adult and peadiatric , History taking and physical assessment ,Assessment 
of new born and peadiatric ,Neonatal resuscitation ,Peadiatric resuscitation  
UNIT-2                                                                                                                                            12 Hours 
Special conditions : Acidosis ,Meconium aspiration Syndrome, Diaphragmatic hernia , Apnea  
Burns, Drowning ,Sudden infant death syndrome  
UNIT -3                                                                                                                                           12 Hours 
Pre mature baby ,Paediatric fluids and derangement ,Management of injured child   
Gastrointestinal Emergencies : Vomiting and diarrhoea in infants and children 
 GI bleeding 
 
 
UNIT-4                                                                                                                                                                   12 Hours 
Respiratory Emergencies 
Laryngotracheal bronchitis, Epiglottis, Airway foreign body, Asthma, Bronchiolitis 
Pneumonia  
Cardiac Emergencies  
Shock, Tetralogy of fallot, Syncope, Congestive heart failure 
UNIT- 5                                                                                                                                                             12 Hours 
Neurological Emergencies  : Seizures, Status epilepticus, Febrile seizure, Altered mental status 
Hypoglycemia, Developmental mile stones. 
 
Course outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to 
1. Recall the anatomical differences between adults and pediatric patients, and the key steps in 
neonatal and pediatric resuscitation 
2. Explain the pathophysiology of special conditions such as acidosis, diaphragmatic hernia, and 
sudden infant death syndrome, and the importance of accurate history taking and physical 
assessment. 
3. Demonstrate the ability to manage gastrointestinal emergencies, including treatment of vomiting, 
diarrhea, and GI bleeding in infants and children. 
4. Differentiate between various respiratory and cardiac emergencies, such as distinguishing between 
the clinical features of asthma, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia, and developing appropriate treatment 
plans. 
5. Assess and formulate effective management strategies for neurological emergencies, such as 
seizures and status epilepticus, and evaluate developmental milestones to ensure comprehensive 
pediatric care. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine – A comphrensive study guide – 9 th Edition Rosen’s Emergency 
Medicine – concepts and clinical Practice – 7 th Edition. 
2. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and bartlett 
publishers. 
Reference Books: 
1. Nelson textbook of paediatrics 18th edition 
2. Kliegman Jenson-saunders Elsevier IAP book of paediatrics.3rd edition A.Parthasarathy Nair- Jayapee 
 
 
 EMTT3503                             SURGICAL EMERGENCIES                                                                                                
     LTPC 
3 104 
Total:60 Hours 
 
Course Description:This course offers a thorough examination of emergency surgical care, 
encompassing the principles of anesthesia, wound management, and treatment of burns. Students will 
learn to address acute abdominal pain, esophageal obstruction, and foreign bodies. The course also delves 
into gastrointestinal bleeding, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, jaundice, intestinal obstruction, hernia, 
appendicitis, and diverticulitis. It covers anorectal disorders, renal colic, abdominal trauma, fluid 
resuscitation, torsion of the testis, and special emergency surgical procedures. Emphasis is placed on 
diagnosing and managing these conditions and understanding the complications that may arise from 
surgical procedures. 
Course Objectives: At the end of the course the students will acquire knowledge of the following 
Aspects: 
1. To understand the principles of anesthesia, wound care, and suturing techniques, and to manage 
burns, acute abdominal pain, esophageal obstruction, and foreign bodies. 
2. To diagnose and treat gastrointestinal bleeding, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, jaundice, intestinal 
obstruction, hernia, appendicitis, and diverticulitis. 
3. To evaluate and manage anorectal disorders, including abscesses, fissures, and hemorrhoids. 
4. To assess and manage renal colic, abdominal trauma, and perform fluid resuscitation and torsion of 
the testis. 
5. To perform special emergency surgical procedures and recognize and manage complications arising 
from these procedures. 
Course Plan 
UNIT-1                                                                                                                                                                       12 Hours 
Principles of anaesthesia, Wounds and suturing, Burns, Acute abdominal pain 
Esophageal obstruction, Foreign bodies 
UNIT-2                                                                                                                                                                           12 Hours 
Gastro intestinal bleeding[endoscopy], Pancreatitis, Cholecystitis ,Jaundice, Intestinal obstruction 
Hernia,Appendicitis,Diverticulitis 
UNIT-3                                                                                                                                                                         12 Hours 
Anorectal disorders, Anorectal abscess, Anorectal fissure, Hemorrhoids 
UNIT-4                                                                                                                                                                         12 Hours  
Renal colic, Abdominal trauma, Fluid resuscitation, Torsion of testis 
UNIT-5                                                                                                                                                                        12 Hours 
Special emergency surgical procedures, Complications of surgical procedures 
 
 
Course Outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to 
1. Recall the principles of anesthesia and the steps involved in wound care, suturing, and managing 
burns and acute abdominal pain. 
2. Explain the pathophysiology and treatment of gastrointestinal emergencies, including pancreatitis, 
cholecystitis, and intestinal obstruction 
3. Demonstrate the ability to evaluate and manage anorectal disorders, such as abscesses, fissures, 
and hemorrhoids, in a clinical setting. 
4. Differentiate between various urological and abdominal trauma conditions, assess the severity, and 
develop appropriate management plans, including fluid resuscitation. 
5. Assess the necessity and execution of special emergency surgical procedures, and evaluate 
potential complications, formulating strategies to manage and mitigate these risks effectively. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Manipal manual of surger,2nd edition 
2. K Rajagopalan Shenoy-CBS publishers 
3. A manual of clinical surgery,7th edition S Das-Dr S.Das 
Reference Books: 
1. Bailey and Love‘s short practice of surgery – 24thedition 
2. Handbook of surgery – Sudhirkumar Jain , Vivek Manchandra RamanTanwar 
ONLINE RESOURCES: 
1. www. emedicine - Medscapereference www. WebMDreference 
 
PROGRAMME ELECTIVE-I 
 
 
EMTT3601a                   PRINCIPLES OF HOSPITAL PRACTICE AND PATIENT CARE 
Total: 45 Hours 
                                                                                                                             
LTPC 
                                                                                                                                                               3003 
 
Course Description: This course provides a comprehensive overview of hospital procedures, patient 
care, first aid, infection control, and departmental procedures for healthcare technologists. Emphasis is 
placed on the professional attitude of technologists, medico-legal aspects, management of various patient 
conditions, first aid techniques, principles of asepsis, sterilization, and departmental organization. The 
course also covers the storage, classification, and regulations regarding the handling of drugs in a 
healthcare setting. Students will develop the skills and knowledge necessary to effectively support patient 
care and maintain efficient departmental operations. 
Course Objectives 
1. To understand hospital staffing, organization, and record-keeping, and develop a professional attitude 
towards patients and staff, while comprehending medico-legal aspects and minimizing patient wait 
times. 
2. To manage the first contact with patients, handle chair and stretcher patients, maintain hygiene, 
provide essential care to patients with tracheotomy or colostomy, and apply sterile dressings. 
3. To learn the aims and objectives of first aid, manage wounds, bleeding, shock, asphyxia, convulsions, 
and perform resuscitation, including the use of suction apparatus and oxygen administration. 
4. To understand the nature and spread of infections, the inflammatory process, principles of asepsis, and 
methods of sterilization, and to identify and care for surgical instruments and dressings. 
5. To manage departmental staffing and organization, maintain professional attitudes, understand 
medico-legal aspects, manage stock keeping, and comprehend drug storage, classification, labeling, 
and regulations. 
 UNIT I                                                                                                                                     9 Hours  
Hospital procedure: Hospital staffing and organization; records relating to patients and departmental 
statistics; professional attitude of the technologist to patients and other members of the staff; medico- 
legal aspects; accidents in the departments, appointments, organization; minimizing waiting time; out
patient and follow-up clinics; stock-taking and stock keeping     
UNIT II                                                                                                                                    9 Hours  
Care of the patient : FIRST contact with patients in the department; management of chair and stretcher 
patients and aids for this, management of the unconscious patient; elementary  
hygiene; personal cleanliness; hygiene in relation to patients (for example clean linen  nursing care; 
temperature pulse and respiration; essential care of the patient who  has a  
 
tracheotomy; essential care of the patient who has a colostomy; bedpans and urinals; simple application of 
a sterile dressing.          
UNIT III                                                                                                                                    9 Hours  
First aid: Aims and objectives of first aid;wounds and bleeding,dressing and bandages; pressure and 
splints, supports etc. Shock; insensibility; asphyxia; convulsions;  
resuscitation, use of suction apparatus, drug reactions; prophylactic measures; administration of oxygen; 
electric shock; burns; scalds; haemorrhage; pressure points; compression band. Fractures; splints, 
bandaging; dressing, foreign bodies; poisons.  
UNIT IV                                                                                                                                    9 Hours 
Infection: Bacteria, their nature and appearance; spread of infections; auto-infection or cross infection; 
the inflammatory process; local tissue reaction, general body reaction; ulceration; asepsis and antisepsis.  
Principles of Asepsis: Sterilization - methods of sterilization; use of central sterile supply department; 
care of identification of instruments, surgical dressings in common use, including  
filamented swabs, elementary operating theatre procedure  
UNIT V                                                                                                                                    9 Hours 
Departmental procedures: Department staffing and organization; records relating to patients and 
departmental statistics; professional attitudes of the technologist to patients and other members of the 
staff, medico-legal aspects accidents in the department; appointments; organization; minimizing waiting  
time; out-patient and follow-up clinics; stock taking and stock keeping.  
Drugs in the department: Storage: classification; labelling and checking, regulations regarding 
dangerous and other drugs; units of measurement, special drugs, anti-depressive, antihypertensive etc. 
COURSE OUTCOME: By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1.  Recall the principles of hospital organization, patient record-keeping, and professional attitudes 
required for effective healthcare delivery. 
2. Explain the procedures for patient care, including managing unconscious patients, maintaining hygiene, 
and providing essential care for patients with specific medical needs. 
3. Demonstrate first aid techniques for managing wounds, bleeding, shock, asphyxia, convulsions, and 
perform resuscitation and oxygen administration in emergency situations. 
4. Differentiate between types of infections and their spread, and analyze the processes of local and 
general tissue reactions, applying principles of asepsis and sterilization in clinical settings. 
5. Assess the efficiency of departmental procedures, including staffing and organization, stock keeping, 
and drug management, ensuring compliance with regulations and minimizing patient waiting times. 
Textbooks: 
1. Emergency Medicine Procedures by Eric Reichman, Robert Simon 
2. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice edited by Ron Walls, Robert 
Hockberger, Marianne Gausche-Hill 
 
REFERENCES  
1. Deeley -Aguide to radiotherapy nursing - Livingstone  
2. Care of patient in Diagnostic Radiography-Chesney&Chesney.  
3. Practical nursing and first-aid-RossandWilson.Livingstone 
 
 
 
 
EMTL3501                                                    CLINICA SKILLS – III 
(240 Hours) 
                                                                                                                                                                   LT PC 
                        00168 
 
Course Description: This course provides an in-depth understanding of essential medical procedures, 
particularly focusing on paediatrics and emergency medicine. Students will learn the theoretical 
foundations and practical skills necessary for conducting normal deliveries, performing pediatric 
assessments, and executing critical emergency procedures. The course is designed to equip students with 
the knowledge and abilities to manage a variety of clinical situations effectively and efficiently 
 
Course Objectives 
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand and perform normal delivery conduction. 
2. Conduct thorough history taking, examination, and presentation of pediatric cases. 
3. Apply Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) principles in clinical practice. 
4. Execute Neonatal Advanced Life Support (NALS) and perform basic wound suturing. 
5. Perform advanced emergency procedures including tracheostomy, intercostal drainage, needle 
thoracocentesis, and cricothyroidectomy. 
 
Unit 1: Normal Delivery Conduction                                                                                    ( 48 Hours) 
1. Explain the stages of labor and delivery. 
2. Demonstrate the steps involved in conducting a normal vaginal delivery. 
3. Identify and manage complications during delivery. 
4. Apply aseptic techniques during delivery. 
5. Provide postnatal care to the mother and newborn. 
Unit 2: Pediatric Case Management                                                                                     ( 48 Hours) 
1. Perform comprehensive history taking for pediatric patients. 
2. Conduct thorough physical examinations of pediatric patients. 
3. Present pediatric cases effectively in a clinical setting. 
4. Develop differential diagnoses based on pediatric assessments. 
5. Formulate management plans for common pediatric conditions. 
Unit 3: Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS)                                                               ( 48 Hours) 
1. Recognize signs of pediatric respiratory and cardiac emergencies. 
2. Implement appropriate resuscitation techniques in pediatric emergencies. 
3. Administer medications according to PALS guidelines. 
4. Utilize equipment necessary for pediatric resuscitation. 
5. Lead a PALS resuscitation team effectively. 
 
Unit 4: Neonatal Advanced Life Support (NALS) and Wound Suturing                          ( 48 Hours) 
1. Describe the principles of neonatal resuscitation. 
2. Perform initial steps of neonatal resuscitation and advanced interventions. 
3. Identify different types of wounds and appropriate suturing techniques. 
4. Demonstrate wound suturing skills. 
5. Manage complications associated with neonatal resuscitation and wound healing. 
Unit 5: Advanced Emergency Procedures                                                                            ( 48 Hours) 
1. Understand indications and contraindications for tracheostomy. 
2. Perform tracheostomy and manage postoperative care. 
3. Execute intercostal drainage for pneumothorax and other conditions. 
4. Perform needle thoracocentesis in emergency situations. 
5. Conduct cricothyroidectomy and manage airway emergencies. 
 Course Outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to  
1. Conduct a normal vaginal delivery and manage potential complications 
2. Perform comprehensive history taking, examination, and case presentation for pediatric patients. 
3. Apply PALS protocols in clinical practice, demonstrating proficiency in pediatric resuscitation. 
4. Execute NALS procedures and wound suturing techniques effectively. 
5. Perform advanced emergency procedures such as tracheostomy, intercostal drainage, needle 
thoracocentesis, and cricothyroidectomy 
 Textbooks 
1. Textbook of Neonatal Resuscitation** by Gary M. Weiner and Jeanette Zaichkin 
2. Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) Provider Manual** by American Heart Association 
 
 Reference Books 
1. Manual of Emergency Airway Management by Ron M. Walls, Michael F. Murphy 
2. Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine by James R. Roberts and Jerris R. Hedges 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMTT3504                                        ORTHOPAEDICS EMERGENCIES  
 
                                                                                LTPC 
3 104 
Total Hours: 60 
 
Course Description :  This course provides an in-depth understanding of various traumatic injuries and 
their management. It covers the types, mechanisms, healing processes, and complications of fractures and 
dislocations. Special emphasis is placed on specific areas such as maxillofacial, head, chest, abdominal, 
genitourinary, shoulder, arm, wrist, hand, pelvic, femur, knee, leg, ankle, and foot injuries. The course 
also addresses trauma in children and pregnant women, as well as soft tissue, nerve, and vascular injuries, 
and introduces techniques like the application of splints and the management of compound fractures. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Gain knowledge of different types of fractures and dislocations, their mechanisms, healing processes, 
and management techniques. This includes recognizing unique aspects and challenges in pediatric 
fractures and associated complications. 
2. Develop the ability to identify, diagnose, and manage various traumatic injuries including head, chest, 
abdominal, and genitourinary tract injuries. Understand specific considerations for trauma in children 
and pregnant women. 
3. Acquire the skills to identify, classify, and manage injuries of the shoulder, upper arm, elbow, wrist, 
and hand. This includes understanding the anatomical and physiological implications of these injuries 
and their treatment protocols. 
4. Learn to diagnose, classify, and manage injuries of the pelvic region, femur, knee, leg, ankle, and 
foot. Recognize the complications associated with lower limb trauma and apply appropriate treatment 
strategies 
5. Understand the diagnosis and treatment of soft tissue, nerve, and vascular injuries. Gain proficiency in 
the application of the pop technique and splints for traction, and manage complex compound fractures 
effectively 
Course Plan 
UNIT-1                                                                                                                                            12 Hours 
Fracture and dislocation : Types, Mechanism, Fracture healing, Management and diagnosis 
Fracture in children, Complications,maxillo-facial injury,Lefortes fracture,Temporo mandibular joint 
dislocation 
 
UNIT-2                                                                                                                                                             12 Hours                                                                                     
Head injury, Chest injury-tension pneumothorax ,hemothorax, Abdominal injury, Genitourinary tract injury 
Trauma in children,Trauma in pregnancies, Spinal injury 
 
 
UNIT-3                                                                                                                                                            12 Hours 
Scapula fracture, Clavicle, Anterior and posterior dislocation Upper Arm, Humerus fracture 
Supra condylar fracture, Dislocation-elbow joint, Radius and ulnar fracture,Monteggia and Galeazzi 
fracture dislocation. Colles fracture,Smith fracture,Barton fracture, Fracture of scaphoid bone  
Metacarpal bone fracture, Dislocation of metacarpal joint,Bennets fracture dislocation 
Crush injury,Mallet finger 
 
UNIT-4                                                                                                                                                             12 Hours 
Pelvic trauma -dislocation,Femur fracture, Acetabular fracture, Knee trauma,Leg trauma,Ankle injuries, 
Foot injuries   
UNIT-5                                                                                                                                                             12 Hours 
Soft tissue injuries, Nerve injuries,Vascular injuries, POP technique, Splints used for traction 
Compound fracture 
 
Course Outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to  
1. Students will be able to list and classify different types of fractures, dislocations, and various 
traumatic injuries (e.g., head, chest, abdominal, genitourinary, and extremities) 
2. Students will be able to explain the mechanisms, healing processes, and physiological impacts of 
fractures, dislocations, and traumatic injuries, as well as the principles behind their diagnosis and 
management. 
3. Students will demonstrate the ability to apply diagnostic procedures and management techniques 
for fractures, dislocations, and other traumatic injuries, including the use of splints, the pop 
technique, and treatment of soft tissue and compound fractures. 
4. Students will analyze different types of injuries and their complications, distinguishing between 
various management protocols for adults, children, and pregnant women, and understanding the 
specific considerations for each group 
5. Students will critically assess the effectiveness of different treatment approaches for fractures, 
dislocations, and traumatic injuries, evaluating long-term outcomes and potential complications, 
and making informed decisions about patient care. 
 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Text book of orthopaedics and traumatology,6th edition,mayilvahanam Natrajan all india publisher 
2. Nancy caroline’s emergency care in the street 7th edition 
3. Rosen’s emergency medicine-concepts and clinical practice-7th edition john marx MD,Robert 
hockberger MD,ron walls MD publisher:Mosby ;7th edition. 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Trauma care manual 2nd edition, Ian Greaves, Keith Parter-HodderArnold 
2. Apleys system of orthopedics and fracture 8th edition, LouisSolomon, David J.Warwick,Selvadurai 
Nayagam- Arnoldpublications 
 
ONLINE REFERENCES: 
www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/.../guidelines_traumacare.pdf  https://www.aofoundation.org
 
EMTT3505                                      PRE-HOSPITAL CARE   
                                                                                                              
L T P C 
 ( Total Hours : 60)                                                                                                                                3 1 0 4 
Course Description : This comprehensive paramedic training program equips participants with the 
knowledge and skills necessary to provide emergency medical care in various settings. The course covers 
foundational concepts such as roles and responsibilities of paramedics, EMS system, medico-legal issues, 
vascular access, medication administration, patient communication, critical thinking, and clinical 
decision-making. Additionally, it delves into specialized areas including trauma management, domestic 
and environmental emergencies, special patient considerations, responding to calls, pre-hospital special 
procedures, and medical emergencies. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Students will be able to articulate the core roles and responsibilities associated with being a paramedic 
within the EMS system, including legal and ethical considerations governing their practice. 
2. Participants will summarize the fundamental principles of Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) 
and apply them in simulated scenarios to effectively manage multiple injuries and prioritize treatment 
based on trauma scoring systems. 
3.  Learners will recognize and appropriately manage a variety of common emergencies, including 
domestic issues like foreign body aspiration, chest pain, and environmental challenges such as heat 
and cold exposure. 
4. Students will develop strategies for managing specialized patient populations, including obstetric, 
neonatal, geriatric, and gynecological emergencies, while demonstrating sensitivity and cultural 
competence in their care. 
5. Participants will implement effective communication and dispatching procedures in response to 
emergency calls, execute proper rescue, extrication, and patient transportation techniques, and apply 
safe moving and lifting practices to ensure patient and provider safety. 
UNIT 1                                                                                                                                                                         12 Hours 
Preparatory 
Roles and Responsibilities of the paramedic, EMS System, Medico legal issues, Vascular Access and 
Medication Administration, Patient Communication, Critical Thinking and Clinical Decision Making 
Trauma: Multiple Injuries Summary of ATLS,Trauma Scoring system,The multi- Casualty Incident. 
 
UNIT 2                                                                                                                                                                         12 Hours 
Domestic Emergencies,Foreign Body Aspiration, Chest pain, Poisoning, Burns, Wound, Unconscious 
Patient, Seizure 
 
UNIT 3                                                                                                                                                                          12 Hours 
 
Environmental Emergencies :Heat Exposure, Cold Exposure 
Special Consideration : Obstetrics, Neonatal care, Geriatric Patients,Gynaecology,Assault, Patient with 
special Needs 
UNIT 4                                                                                                                                                                        12 Hours 
Responding to call :Communication and Dispatching, Rescue and Extrication 
Moving and Lifting patients : General Principles, Patient Positioning, Lifting Aids 
UNIT 5                                                                                                                                                                        12 Hours 
Pre hospital Special Procedure, Major Incidents,Civil Disturbances 
Hazardous Substances,Managing Violence 
Medical Emergency: Respiratory Emergency,Cardiovascular Emergency,Gastrointestinal Emergency 
Neuo Emergency,Unconscious Patient,Anaphylaxis, Toxic Substance, Abuse, Poisoning 
Course outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to 
1. Students will understand the roles and responsibilities of paramedics and grasp trauma management 
principles, including ATLS and trauma scoring systems. 
2. Graduates will effectively manage common emergencies, analyze patient presentations, and adapt 
interventions to different situations. 
3. Students will analyze complex patient scenarios, make informed clinical decisions, and evaluate the 
effectiveness of protocols. 
4. Participants will communicate effectively with patients, families, and healthcare teams, demonstrating 
empathy and cultural sensitivity. 
5. Graduates will uphold professionalism, ethical practice, and integrity while continuously improving 
their skills and contributing to the field of emergency medical services. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine – A comphrensive study guide – 9 th Edition Rosen’s Emergency 
Medicine – concepts and clinical Practice – 7 th Edition. 
2. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and bartlett 
publishers. 
Reference Books: 
1. Oxford Handbook of Hospital care – 2 nd Edition 
2. ABC of Prehospital Emergency Medicine by Tim Nutbeam,MatthewBoylan 
ONLINE RESOURCES:   Books.google.co.in www.willey.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMTT3506     DISASTER  MANAGEMENT                                                                                                
 
L T P C 
(Total Hours: 60) 
                                                                                                                                                               3 1 0 4 
Course Description: The Disaster Management Training Program provides participants with 
comprehensive knowledge and skills necessary to effectively prepare for, respond to, and mitigate the 
impacts of disasters. Spanning multiple units, the course covers various aspects of disaster management, 
including principles, policies, causes, types, preparedness strategies, organization of emergency services, 
and the impact of disasters on health. 
Course Objectives:  
1. Students will grasp the fundamental principles of disaster management, including historical 
perspectives and basic perspectives on disasters. They will also analyze various policies related to 
emergency and disaster management at international, national, state, and institutional levels. 
2.  Participants will categorize and differentiate between natural disasters (e.g., earthquakes, hurricanes) 
and man-made disasters (e.g., terrorist bombings, hazardous material emergencies) and understand the 
unique challenges and responses associated with each type. 
3. Students will develop disaster preparedness strategies, including team formation, guidelines, 
protocols, and resource allocation. They will also understand the importance of community 
involvement, coordination with various government departments and NGOs, and the role of 
international agencies in disaster management. 
4. Learners will identify common industrial hazards such as electrocution, amputation, falls, and 
assaults, and understand strategies for mitigating these risks. They will also analyze the impact of 
natural and man-made disasters on health, including epidemics, violence, terrorism, and biochemical 
threats. 
5. Participants will organize emergency services, including physical setup, staffing, equipment, supplies, 
and protocols. They will also assess the impact of disasters on health, including post-traumatic stress 
disorder, rehabilitation needs, psycho social support, financial implications, and relocation 
requirements. 
Course Plan 
UNIT 1                                                                                                                                                                 12 Hours 
Principles and Policies, History of Disaster, Basic Perspectives on Disaster, Principles of Hospital Disaster 
Planning, Emergency Medical Services in Disaster, Policies Related to Emergency/Disaster Management, 
International, National, state, Institutional. 
UNIT 2                                                                                                                                                                 12 Hours 
Causes and Types of Disaster 
Natural Disasters: Earthquakes, Tornado, Hurricanes, Winter storm, Floods, Fire Storm and Wild fires, 
 
Tsunamis, Volcanic Eruptions, Heat Related Disasters. 
Man Made Disasters : Hazardous Material Emergencies, Radiation Injuries, Air Crash Disasters, 
Maritime Disasters, Derailing, Terrorist Bombing, Fire and Burn care, Chemical Disasters, Biologic 
Weapons, Mass shooting, Research in Disaster Management 
UNIT 3                                                                                                                                                                       12 Hours 
Disaster Preparedness, Team , Guidelines, Protocols, Equipments, Resources, Co-ordination and 
Involvement of community, various governments Departments and Non-Government. Organization, 
International Agencies and Legal Aspects of Disaster Management 
UNIT 4                                                                                                                                                                     12 Hours 
Industrial Hazards: Electro caution, Amputation, Crush injury, fall from height and Assaults, Natural and 
Manmade Earthquakes, Floods, Epidemics, Cyclones fire, Explosions, Accidents, Violence, Terrorism, 
Biochemical, War. 
UNIT 5                                                                                                                                                                   12 Hours 
Organization of Emergency Services, Physical Setup, Staffing, Equipments and Supplies and Protocols 
Impact on Health and after Effects, Post-Traumatic stress disorder, Rehabilitation, Physical, Psychosocial, 
Financial and Relocation 
Course Outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to 
1. Students will demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of disaster management principles, 
policies, causes, and types of disasters, as well as the organization of emergency services and their 
impact on health. 
2. Graduates will apply their knowledge to analyze and categorize various disasters, develop 
preparedness strategies, and organize emergency services effectively in response to different types 
of disasters. 
3. Participants will critically evaluate disaster scenarios, assess risks, develop mitigation strategies, 
and analyze the effectiveness of disaster response protocols. 
4. Graduates will communicate effectively with stakeholders, coordinate with various agencies, and 
collaborate with community members to ensure a cohesive and efficient response to disasters. 
5. Learners will demonstrate professionalism, integrity, and ethical conduct in their roles within 
disaster management, prioritizing the well-being of affected populations and adhering to legal and 
ethical standards.. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Disaster Management – Dr.Mrinalini Pandey 
2. Text book of Disaster Management – A.K. Srivastava 
3. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine – concepts and clinical Practice – 7 th Edition. 
Reference Books: 
1. Nancy Caroline Emergency care in the streets-6th edition, Editor Andrew N.Pollar Jones and bartlett 
 
publishers. 
2. Wilderness Medicine, 6 th Edition., Paul Auerbach Disaster Medicine – 2 nd Edition DavidE.Hogan 
 
PROGRAMME ELECTIVE-II 
 
EMTT3602a                                         MEDICAL RECORDS                                                                              
         L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                          3 0 0 3 
45 Hours 
 
Course Description: This course on Medical Records Management provides comprehensive knowledge 
and skills essential for effectively managing medical records in healthcare settings. The course covers 
principles and practices related to the creation, maintenance, analysis, and control of medical records, 
along with the implementation of electronic medical records systems and adherence to legal and 
regulatory standards. Through a detailed exploration of departmental policies, storage and retention 
methods, and the utilization of technology, students will be equipped to ensure the accuracy, security, and 
accessibility of medical records. 
Course Objectives: 
1. Identify medical record  
2. Identify the policies and methods of medical record department  
3. Apply the tolls to maintain medical records  
4. Classify the types of medical record  
5. Identify medical audit and movement. 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                          (9Hours) 
Good Medical Records, What is entered, How to do entries in Medical records 
UNIT II                                                                                                                                       (9Hours) 
Medical Records Department Policies, Functions, Location, Space and Layout Equipment, Forms 
Designing and Control Medical Records Flow and Processing, Analysis of Medical Record Quantitative 
& Qualitative, Incomplete Record Control 
UNIT III                                                                                                                                       (9Hours) 
Maintenance of medical records How why Filing Methods, Storage, and Retention Numbering and Filing 
Systems, Storage-Microfilming and Disk Storage Retention, Registers & Indexes 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                                       (9Hours) 
Types of medical records Ambulatory Care Records {Emergency & Outpatient Records] Clinical Records 
in Long Term Care and Rehabilitation Facilities Mental Health Records Electronic medical records, 
Organizational Aspects of Medical Record Department Computerization in medical records 
UNIT V                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Record movement control & Tracking system Medical audit 
Course Outcomes 
1. Students will be able to recall the essential components and best practices for creating and 
maintaining medical records. 
 
2.  Students will understand the policies and functions of the medical records department and the 
importance of accurate recordkeeping in healthcare settings. 
3. Students will be able to apply various filing methods, storage, and retention practices to ensure the 
integrity and accessibility of medical records. 
4. Students will analyze different types of medical records, including ambulatory care, long-term care, 
and mental health records, to ensure their proper management and compliance 
5. Students will evaluate the effectiveness of record movement control and tracking systems and conduct 
medical audits to ensure compliance with legal and regulatory standards. 
 
Recommended Text Books: 
1.  Handbook of Medical record technology- Jaco 
2. Medical Records and the Law by William H. Roach. 
3.  Electronic Health Records: Understanding and Using Computerized Medical Record by Richard 
Gartee. 
Reference Books: 
1. Health Information Management: Concepts, Principles, and Practice by Kathleen M. LaTour and 
Shirley Eichenwald Maki. 
2. Principles of Healthcare Management: Foundations for a Changing Healthcare System by Seth B. 
Goldsmith.
 
EMTL3502                                            CLINICA SKILLS - IV 
 
240 Hours 
 
L T P C 
                                                                                                                                                                  0 0 16 8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Course Description: This course provides an extensive overview of emergency medical procedures and 
trauma management, emphasizing pre-hospital care and the management of critically ill patients. Students 
will learn essential skills for spine immobilization, splinting techniques, and the use of diagnostic 
imaging. The course also covers the management of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and industrial 
hazards. The curriculum is designed to enhance the knowledge and practical abilities required for 
effective emergency and trauma care. 
Course Objectives 
By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Perform log roll and spine immobilization techniques safely. 
2. Apply appropriate splinting techniques for various types of fractures and injuries. 
3. Interpret X-rays and CT scans to aid in the diagnosis and management of trauma patients. 
4. Identify and utilize equipment commonly used in pre-hospital settings. 
5. Manage critically ill patients and address post-traumatic stress disorder and industrial hazards 
effectively. 
Unit 1: Log Roll and Spine Immobilization                                                                          48 Hours 
Describe the anatomy and physiology of the spine and its relevance to immobilization, Demonstrate the 
log roll technique for moving patients with suspected spinal injuries. Apply various spine immobilization 
techniques, including the use of cervical collars and backboards. Identify signs and symptoms of spinal 
injuries and complications. Ensure patient safety and comfort during spine immobilization procedures. 
 
Unit 2: Splinting Techniques                                                                                                  48 Hours 
Explain the principles of splinting and the types of splints used in trauma care. Demonstrate the 
application of splints for upper and lower limb fractures, Apply immobilization techniques for joint 
dislocations, Recognize and manage complications associated with improper splinting. Educate patients 
and caregivers on the care of splinted injuries. 
 
Unit 3: Diagnostic Imaging (X-ray and CT)                                                                        48 Hours 
Understand the basics of radiology and the role of X-rays and CT scans in trauma diagnosis. Identify 
common fractures and injuries on X-ray and CT images. Apply knowledge of radiological principles to 
interpret trauma-related findings. Discuss the indications, contraindications, and safety considerations for 
X-rays and CT scans. Collaborate with radiologists and other healthcare professionals in the interpretation 
 
of diagnostic images. 
 
Unit 4: Pre-Hospital Equipment and Critically Ill Patient Management                      48 Hours 
Identify essential equipment used in pre-hospital emergency care. Demonstrate the use of pre-hospital 
equipment, including defibrillators, oxygen delivery systems, and trauma kits. Assess and manage 
critically ill patients in pre-hospital settings. Implement advanced life support techniques in the 
management of critically ill patients. Develop protocols for the effective transportation of critically ill 
patients to healthcare facilities. 
 
Unit 5: Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and Industrial Hazards                                  48 Hours 
Recognize the signs and symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Implement strategies for the 
management and treatment of PTSD in trauma patients, Identify common industrial hazards and their 
impact on health.Develop emergency response plans for industrial accidents and hazards. 
Educate workers and the public on prevention and management of industrial hazards. 
 
Course outcome: After completion of the course students will be able to  
1. Safely perform log roll and spine immobilization techniques to prevent further injury. 
2. Apply appropriate splinting techniques to immobilize fractures and dislocations effectively. 
3. Interpret X-ray and CT scan results to aid in the diagnosis and management of trauma patients. 
4. Utilize pre-hospital equipment proficiently and manage critically ill patients in emergency 
situations. 
5. Address post-traumatic stress disorder and industrial hazards with effective management strategies 
and preventive measures. 
Recommended Text Books: 
1. Emergency Care and Transportation of the Sick and Injured by American Academy of Orthopaedic 
Surgeons (AAOS) 
2. Trauma Nursing: From Resuscitation Through Rehabilitation by Karen A. McQuillan, Donna W. 
Proulx, and Meg Blair 
Reference Books: 
1. Principles of Trauma Care by George D. Zuidema and Donald D. Trunkey 
2. Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) Student Course Manual  by American College of Surgeons 
 
 
V SEMESTER SYLLABUS 
 
PROGRAMME  ELECTIVE-I 
EMTT3601b           
 
CRITICAL CONCEPTS AND DECISION MAKING IN EMERGENCY MEDICINE 
Total: 45 Hours 
                                                                                                                             
LTPC 
                                                                                                                                                               3003 
Course Description: This course is designed to enhance students' clinical judgment and decision-making 
skills in managing common emergency presentations across multiple body systems. Through five 
comprehensive modules, students will explore symptom-based evaluation, pathophysiology, diagnostics, 
and evidence-based emergency care.  
Course Objectives: 
1. To describe the signs, symptoms, and pathophysiological mechanisms of common emergency 
conditions across dermatological, cardiovascular, metabolic, gastrointestinal, neurological, and 
respiratory systems. 
2. To explain the clinical significance and emergency implications of presenting complaints such as 
fatigue, dyspnea, hypoglycemia, seizures, and abdominal pain. 
3. To apply appropriate assessment tools and treatment protocols in managing various emergency 
conditions based on presenting symptoms. 
4. To analyze clinical data and differentiate between similar presenting symptoms to arrive at accurate 
emergency diagnoses. 
5. To develop critical thinking and clinical decision-making skills to formulate effective management 
plans for patients presenting with acute and systemic emergencies. 
 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                         (9 Hours) 
DERMATOLOGY : It focuses on systemic and dermatological symptoms like fatigue, edema, 
diaphoresis, and chronic pain, along with ENT-related symptoms such as red eye, rhinitis, tinnitus, and 
cardiac murmurs. 
UNIT II                                                                                                                                       (9 Hours) 
Cardiovascular Conditions covers a wide range of cardiac emergencies, including hypertension, 
hypotension, palpitations, congestive cardiac failure, cor pulmonale, and dyspnea.       
UNIT III                                                                                                                                     (9 Hours) 
Electrolyte Imbalance : critical metabolic and temperature regulation disorders such as 
hypo/hyperglycemia, hypo/hyperthermia, frostbite, and associated digestive disturbances like anorexia 
and dysphagia. 
  
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                                    (9 Hours) 
Gastrointestinal Disorders : Acute abdominal symptoms and disorders including chest pain of non
cardiac origin, dyspepsia, ascites, rectal bleeding, constipation, and irritable bowel syndrome. 
UNIT V                                                                                                                                     (9 Hours) 
Neurological and Respiratory Emergencies provides essential training in managing seizures, strokes, 
altered mental status, and respiratory emergencies like wheezing, cough, and hemoptysis. 
 
COURSE OUTCOME 
1. To describe and identify dermatological and systemic symptoms such as fatigue, edema, diaphoresis, 
red eye, and murmur, and apply appropriate clinical approaches in emergency care. 
2. To interpret signs and symptoms of cardiovascular emergencies including hypertension, hypotension, 
and congestive cardiac failure, and analyze their impact for initiating emergency interventions. 
3. To recognize clinical presentations of electrolyte and thermal imbalances such as hypoglycemia, 
hyperthermia, and frostbite, and apply emergency treatment protocols accordingly. 
4. To differentiate between various gastrointestinal emergencies like dyspepsia, rectal bleeding, and IBS, 
and evaluate diagnostic findings to determine suitable treatment plans. 
5. To assess and prioritize management strategies in patients with seizures, stroke, or respiratory 
distress, and develop effective decision-making pathways in time-sensitive emergency scenarios. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. Barbara-Mosby, Paramedic practice today above and beyond- Elsevier, 2010  
2. Mosbys Mick J.Sanders, Mosbys paramedic textbook,4th edition, Mosby Elsevier, 2010 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. D.Tripathi, essentials of Medical Pharmacology, 6thedition, jaypee, 2018 
2. Marx hockberger walls, Rosens emergency medicine, 7th edition, jaypee, 1835 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V SEMESTER SYLLABUS 
 
PROGRAMME ELECTIVE-I 
EMTT3601c           
 
SOFT SKILLS AND CLINICAL COMMUNICATION SKILLS 
 
Total: 45 Hours 
Course Description: Effective emergency care is not solely about clinical expertise it demands sharp 
communication, teamwork, emotional intelligence, and interpersonal sensitivity. This course is designed 
to equip students of emergency care with essential soft skills and clinical communication competencies 
vital for time-critical environments.  
Course Objectives: 
 
To demonstrate effective verbal, non-verbal, and para-verbal communication with patients, caregivers, 
and healthcare team members. 
 
To apply empathy, compassion, and professionalism in all patient interactions. 
 
To handle difficult and sensitive conversations, including delivering bad news, in an ethical and 
patient-centered manner. 
 
To work collaboratively and communicate effectively within multidisciplinary healthcare teams. 
 
To exhibit leadership qualities, effective time management, and emotional intelligence while 
managing stressful and emergency situations. 
UNIT I                                                                                                                                  (9 Hours) 
Foundation of Healthcare Communication: Importance and components of communication in clinical 
settings, Verbal, non-verbal, and para-verbal communication, Barriers to effective communication, Active 
listening and self-awareness, Building rapport with patients and families, Open vs closed-ended questions, 
ICE technique (Ideas, Concerns, Expectations), Empathy, compassion, and cultural sensitivity 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                                     (9 Hours) 
Clinical and Ethical Communication: Patient history taking and case presentation, Communication 
during examination, Explaining diagnosis and procedures, Informed consent: legal and ethical 
considerations, SOAP format and clinical documentation 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                                  (9 Hours) 
Interpersonal Communication in Healthcare Teams : Healthcare teams and collaborative roles, SBAR 
format for interprofessional communication, Conflict resolution, feedback exchange, Respect in hierarchies 
and team dynamics 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                                    
(9 Hours) 
Crisis and Special Situation Communication: SPIKES protocol for breaking bad news, Handling 
emotionally charged events and psychological first aid, communicating with families during critical 
events, End-of-life and DNR conversations, Communication with children, elderly, impaired, psychiatric 
patients Working with interpreters 
UNIT V                                                                                                                                   
(9 Hours) 
Professional Development and Practical Skills: Time management, multitasking, and decision-making in 
emergencies, Emotional intelligence, ethics, and professionalism Grooming, body language, and etiquette, 
Simulations, role plays, OSCEs 
COURSE OUTCOME 
 
 
To demonstrate effective verbal, non-verbal, and para-verbal communication skills in clinical and 
emergency healthcare settings. 
To manage crisis situations and emotionally sensitive interactions, including breaking bad news, end
of-life communication, and emergency decision-making. 
REFERENCES 
TEXT BOOKS 
1.Silverman J, Kurtz S, Draper J. Skills for Communicating with Patients. 3rd ed. CRC Press, London. 
2.Arnold EC, Boggs KU. Interpersonal Relationships: Professional Communication Skills for Nurses. 8th 
ed. Elsevier, USA. 
REFERENCE BOOKS 
1.Back AL, Arnold RM, Tulsky JA. Mastering Communication with Seriously Ill Patients. Cambridge 
University Press. 
To apply principles of empathy, cultural sensitivity, and professionalism while interacting with 
patients and families. 
 
 
 
To perform accurate patient history taking, case presentation, and clinical documentation using 
standard formats such as SOAP. 
To communicate effectively within multidisciplinary healthcare teams using structured tools like 
SBAR and conflict resolution strategies. 
 
2.Hargie O. Skilled Interpersonal Communication: Research, Theory and Practice. Routledge, UK. 
 
VI SEMESTER SYLLABUS 
 
PROGRAMME ELECTIVE-II 
 
EMTT3602b                 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY AND BIOSTATISTICS                                                           
LTPC 
     3 0 0 3 
45 Hours 
 
Course Description: This course provides a detailed Knowledge on the basic principles of research and 
methods applied to draw inferences from the research findings. The students will also be made aware of 
the need of biostatistics and understanding of data, sampling methods, in addition to being given 
information about the relation between data and variables.  
Course Objectives: 
1. To explain the foundational concepts, objectives, and types of research, including research ethics and 
designs.  
2. To identify appropriate methods of data collection, sampling, and research tool selection in the 
development of research proposals.  
3. To interpret biostatistical data and classify different types of variables and data relevant to health 
sciences.  
4. To analyze data using statistical methods such as measures of central tendency, probability 
distributions, and significance tests.  
5. To develop skills in scientific writing by integrating literature, data, and research findings to produce 
professional reports and journal articles.  
UNIT I                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Foundation of Research 
Definition of Research, Introduction to research methods, Objectives of Research, Identifying research 
problem, Types of Research & Research Approaches, Research Methods vs Methodology Ethical issues 
in research, Research design. 
 
UNIT II                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Research Problem and Data collection 
Research Problem, Measurement & Scaling Techniques, Types of Data, Research tools and Data 
collection methods, Sampling methods, randomization, crossover design, placebo, blinding techniques, 
Developing a research proposal. 
 
UNIT III                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Introduction to Biostatistics 
Meaning, Definition, and Characteristics of Statistics, Importance of the Study of Statistics, 
Understanding of data in biostatistics, Statistics in Health Science, How & where to get relevant data, 
Relation between data & variables, Type of variables: defining data sets. 
 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Data Analysis and Dissemination 
Basic Principles of Data Graphical Representation, Analysis of variance & covariance. Measures of 
central tendency include mean, median, and mode. Probability and standard distributions include 
binomial and normal distributions. Sample size calculation, Sampling techniques address sampling need, 
criteria, procedures, design errors, variation, and tests of significance. Statistical significance involves 
parametric and non-parametric tests 
 
UNIT V                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Scientific Writing 
Introduction, reviewing literature, formulating research problems and proposals, integrating theory and 
data and understanding citation and referencing practices. Types of reports, formal report layout, and 
journal standards (impact factor, citation index). importance of communicating science, challenges in 
Scientific Writing, Plagiarism and its detection and writing scientific papers. 
 
Course outcome: 
1. To demonstrate an understanding of the fundamental concepts and principles of research 
methodology. 
2. To apply appropriate methods for data collection in various types of research studies. 
3. To analyze and interpret research data using relevant biostatistical tools and techniques. 
4. To develop research or review manuscripts suitable for publication in academic or scientific 
journals. 
5. To effectively collaborate and communicate solutions to research problems, both independently and 
in team settings. 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. S.P. Gupta, Statistical Methods, Sultan Chand & Sons, Edition 46,2023. 
2. C.R. Kothari, Research Methodology, New age International Publisher, Edition 4, 2019 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Himanshu Tyagi, Biostatistics Buster, Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers, Edition 1,2011 
 
2. Bratati Banerjee, Mahajans Methods in Bistatistical for medical students and research workers,  
Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers, Edition 9, 2018. 
 
PROGRAMME ELECTIVE-II 
 
EMTT3602c                                       AMBULANCE   SERVICES                                                                 
LTPC 
     3 0 0 3 
45 Hours 
 
Course Description: This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive understanding of 
the operations, management, and clinical practices involved in providing emergency medical services 
through ambulance systems. This course covers a range of topics, including the historical development, 
organizational structure, and operational procedures of ambulance services, along with the technical and 
practical aspects of patient care during transportation to healthcare facilities. 
 
Course objectives: 
1. To analyze the structure, organization, and types of ambulance services, and evaluate their roles and 
responsibilities within the healthcare system.  
2. To apply effective communication and dispatch protocols in emergency medical situations, ensuring 
timely and appropriate responses in line with industry standards.  
3. To assess and manage patient care in pre-hospital environments, utilizing Basic Life Support (BLS) and 
Advanced Life Support (ALS) techniques based on patient needs and clinical guidelines.  
4. To design operational management strategies for ambulance services, focusing on resource allocation, 
equipment maintenance,  to ensure effective service delivery.  
5. To examine the legal, ethical, and professional issues related to ambulance services and propose solutions 
for maintaining high standards of practice in emergency medical care.  
UNIT I                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Introduction to Ambulance Services 
 Overview of Ambulance Services 
 History and development of ambulance services,Types of ambulance services (emergency, non
emergency, special care transport),Structure and organization of ambulance services 
 Roles and Responsibilities of Ambulance Personnel 
 EMTs, paramedics, ambulance drivers, and support staff,Chain of command in an ambulance service 
system 
 Types of Ambulance Vehicles 
 
 Standard ambulance, Advanced life support (ALS), Basic life support (BLS), Critical care 
transport,Vehicle equipment and technology 
Ambulance Service Regulations and Standards 
National and International standards for ambulance services (e.g., WHO, EMS regulations),  Licensing 
and accreditation of Ambulance services 
UNIT II                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Ambulance Operations and Communication 
 Dispatch and Communication Systems: Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD) protocols, 
Communication systems: radio, Mobile Data Terminals (MDTs), and GPS, Patient information 
transfer between dispatch and responders 
 Ambulance Response Procedures: Response time and prioritization of calls, Safety measures during 
response,Traffic regulations and route planning for ambulances 
 Operational Protocols: Triage and Patient categorization, Infection control and safety protocols, 
Managing Multiple Casualty Incidents (MCI) and Disasters 
UNIT III     
                                                                                                                                                         (9Hours) 
 Patient Assessment and Care in Ambulance 
 Initial Patient Assessment: Scene size-up and safety considerations, Primary and secondary surveys, 
Assessing vital signs, Airway, Breathing, and Circulation 
 Pre-Hospital Care Protocols:Basic Life Support (BLS) and Advanced Life Support (ALS) 
techniques,Airway management and Ventilation techniques (e.g., Intubation, Suctioning), Spinal 
Immobilization and trauma care, Pharmacological interventions and medication administration 
 Handling Special Populations:Pediatric and geriatric patient care,Obstetric emergencies,Care of 
patients with chronic conditions (e.g., heart failure, diabetes) 
UNIT IV                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Ambulance Service Management and Logistics 
 Operational Management of Ambulance Services: Staff management, training, and certifications, 
Scheduling and deployment of ambulance units, Incident command and coordination 
 Resource Management: Equipment management and maintenance, Ambulance fleet management, 
Stocking and inventory of medical supplies 
 
 Quality Assurance and Improvement: Monitoring and evaluating service delivery, Incident reviews and 
quality improvement strategies,Patient and family feedback mechanisms 
UNIT V                                                                                                                                        (9Hours) 
Legal, Ethical, and Professional Aspects of Ambulance Services 
 Legal Framework for Ambulance Services: EMS laws and regulations (e.g., patient rights, informed 
consent, mandatory reporting),Liability, malpractice, and negligence issues,Confidentiality and data 
protection (HIPAA, GDPR) 
 Ethical Considerations in Ambulance Services:Ethical dilemmas in emergency care (e.g., end-of-life 
decisions, consent for minors),Cultural competence and patient respect,Conflict resolution in stressful 
situations 
 Professionalism and Code of Ethics:Professional behavior and communication in the ambulance service 
setting,Certification and continuing education for paramedics and EMTs,Standards of practice and 
code of ethics for EMS personnel 
Course outcome 
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the history, types, roles, and regulatory standards of ambulance 
services and explain their integration into the emergency healthcare system. 
2. Illustrate the procedures involved in ambulance dispatch, communication systems, and operational 
protocols required for effective response to emergency calls. 
3. Perform systematic patient assessments and implement appropriate pre-hospital emergency 
interventions using BLS and ALS protocols. 
4. Develop and manage ambulance service operations, including vehicle readiness, equipment 
inventory, and staff coordination to ensure uninterrupted emergency response. 
5. Analyze legal, ethical, and professional responsibilities of ambulance personnel and apply best 
practices to uphold patient rights and maintain professional conduct. 
REFERENCES 
TEXT BOOKS 
1. Emergency Care and Transportation of the Sick and Injured, AAOS, 12th Edition. 
2. Prehospital Emergency Care, Joseph J. Mistovich, Keith J. Karren, Brent Hafen, 11th Edition. 
REFERENCE BOOKS 
1. Principles of Emergency Medical Dispatch, Jeff Clawson & Kate Dernocoeur, 4th Edition. 
2. Mosby’s Paramedic Textbook, Mick J. Sanders, 5th Edition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 VII & VIII SEMESTER SYLLABUS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internship Guidelines 
Effective from 2021 Admitted Batch 
 
Sl. no CONTENTS 
1 Description  
2 Objectives 
3 General guidelines 
4 Guidelines for completion, leave & repetition 
5 Time distribution 
6 Competencies to be acquired during the internship 
7 Assessment Plan 
 
 
DESCRIPTION: 
 
The internship for BSc Emergency Medical Technology spans one year, providing students with 
extensive practical training across key departments of various Hospitals. This hands-on experience 
aims to develop confidence, proficiency, and advanced skills necessary for a career in Allied Health 
Sciences. 
OBJECTIVES 
1. Skill Development: Develop competence in beginning and intermediate clinical skills procedures 
relevant to respective departments. 
2. Observational Learning: Observe and understand advanced and specialized procedures in hospital 
settings. 
3. Clinical Practice: Apply theoretical knowledge gained in classrooms to practical settings, 
demonstrating proficiency in conducting invasive and noninvasive techniques. 
4. Logbook Maintenance: Maintain a detailed work logbook endorsed by supervisors or trainers, 
documenting daily activities and achievements during the internship. 
 
GENERAL GUIDELINES 
  
1. Every candidate, after passing the final semester exams (should not have any back papers), is 
required to undergo a compulsory rotatory internship for a period of 12 months (365 calendar 
days) to be eligible for the award of the degree. 
2. Internship is in partial fulfilment of the requirements of the course, and no candidate shall be 
declared to have completed the course otherwise. 
3. All parts of the internship shall be done in the teaching hospital under a National Medical 
Commission (NMC)/National Accreditation Board for Hospital and Healthcare 
Providers (NABH). 
 
4.  The interns should conduct themselves in a manner befitting the profession and should dress 
appropriately in their respective work areas. 
5. Interns should complete postings in all specialties as decided by the department. 
6. Students are eligible to commence internship from next month of completion of their end 
semester examination (6th semester). 
7. Each intern should maintain a logbook wherever he/she is posted. The intern has to get a 
signature from the supervising staff at the end of each posting. 
8. Project work/ duties during the internship must be duly undertaken and performed. 
9. A review meeting to assess the progress of the project and logbook will be conducted on the first 
Saturday of every third month. A detailed report on the progress must be submitted following 
each meeting. 
10. The intern is allowed to take his internship from other than the parent institution, provided there 
is a NOC obtained from both the parent institution and the institution offering the internship. 
Dean has to permit the student for internship after verifying the NOC. 
 
GUIDELINES FOR COMPLETION, LEAVE & REPETITION  
COMPLETION  
 
The internship shall be completed within  months of passing the final semester examination whenever 
in force but not limited to. 
 
LEAVE  
Normal Leave: Intern shall be permitted a maximum of 12 days leave with prior permission during 
the entire period of internship.  
The entire period of 12 days cannot be availed during any one-week / two week postings applicable to 
a single department. 
Medical Leave: Medical leave shall be included within the 12 days of normal leave. Any medical 
leave beyond this period shall be recommended only by a duly constituted committee at the college 
level, which consists of the Dean, HOD, Supervisor and medical practitioner. The internship shall be 
extended if the leave of absence extends beyond this period. 
 
Department Duration Roles of EMT Student 
Casualty (ER) 2 Months Assist in triage, monitor vitals, perform BLS, support emergen
cy procedures. 
Triage Area 1 Month Prioritize patients, assess vitals, assign triage codes, document 
findings. 
Ambulance 2 Month 
On
scene assessment, assist in BLS/transport, oxygen use, handov
er in ER. 
 Paediatrics 1 Month Monitor child vitals, support care in emergencies, assist in neo
 
natal care. 
OBG / Labor Room 1 Month Monitor mother/fetal vitals, assist in labor & delivery, observe 
obstetric emergencies. 
General Medicine / 
 Cardiology 
1 Month Record history, monitor vitals, observe chronic/acute medical 
care, assist in ECG. 
Orthopaedics 1 Month Support fracture care, apply splints, assist in trauma evaluation
 and transfers. 
General Surgery 1 Month 
Post
op care, wound dressing, assist minor procedures, prepare for s
urgeries. 
ICU (Intensive Care) 1 Month Monitor critical patients, observe ventilator care, assist with air
way and fluid management. 
Operation Theatre (OT) 1 Month Assist in patient prep, monitor during procedures, help with ins
trument handling & sterility. 
 
 
 
COMPETENCIES TO BE ACQUIRED DURING INTERNSHIP 
 
Upon completion of their internship, students in the B.Sc Emergency Medical Technology (EMT) 
program should demonstrate the following competencies: 
 
1. Proficiently Perform a Full Range of Pre-Hospital and Emergency Medical Procedures 
2. Effective Management and Communication in Emergency Situations 
3. Specimen Collection and Basic Diagnostic Skills in Field Settings 
4. Use of Emergency Medical Equipment 
5. Accurate Documentation and Record-Keeping 
6. Critical Thinking and Clinical Decision-Making 
7. Adherence to Protocols and Safety Procedures 
8. Emergency Scene Management and Safety Assessment 
9. Continuous Learning and Adaptation in Dynamic Healthcare Scenarios 
10.Application of Ethical and Legal Standards in Emergency Care 
 
Academic Project/Dissertation 
A Student wants to complete the project work in addition to an Internship. 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code : EMTI4501 
Course Name : Internship-I 
 
 
S. No. Component of 
Assessment 
Marks 
Allotted 
Type of 
Assessment 
Scheme of Evaluation 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Internship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Assessment  
80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
Continuous 
Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
End Assessment 
 Twenty (20) marks for review 
assessment. 
 Each review assessment will 
carry 20 marks.  
 A total of three review 
assessment will be held over 12 
months, scheduled on the first 
Saturday of every third month. 
 The 20 marks for each review 
assessment will be distributed as 
follows: 5 marks for the 
logbook, 5 marks for the report, 
5 marks for the presentation, 
and 5 marks for the viva. 
 20 Marks for final Internship 
report submission.  
 
Twenty (20) marks  
 Final Presentation (10marks)  
 Viva-voce (10 marks) 
 Total 100   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code : EMTI4502 
Course Name : Internship-II 
 
 
S. No. Component of 
Assessment 
Marks 
Allotted 
Type of 
Assessment 
Scheme of Evaluation 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Internship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Assessment  
80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
Continuous 
Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
End Assessment 
 Twenty (20) marks for review 
assessment. 
 Each review assessment will 
carry 20 marks.  
 A total of three review 
assessment will be held over 12 
months, scheduled on the first 
Saturday of every third month. 
 The 20 marks for each review 
assessment will be distributed as 
follows: 5 marks for the 
logbook, 5 marks for the report, 
5 marks for the presentation, 
and 5 marks for the viva. 
 20 Marks for final Internship 
report submission.  
 
Twenty (20) marks  
 Final Presentation (10marks)  
 Viva-voce (10 marks) 
 Total 100   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code : EMTP4501 
Course Name : Project Work 
 
S. No. Component of 
Assessment 
Marks 
Allotted 
Type of 
Assessment 
Scheme of Evaluation 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Project Work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project 
Work/Dissertation  
80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
Continuous 
Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Assessment 
Continuous Assessment -80mark 
Project Planning and Proposal 
approval - 20 mark 
Project Execution - 20 mark 
Log Book- 20 mark 
Project Report - 20 mark 
 
Twenty (20) marks  
 Final Presentation (10marks)  
 Viva-voce (10 marks) 
 Total 100   
 
SEMESTER VII INTERNSHIP 
 
Course Outcome: 
 
1. To became a competent Allied Health science professional Engaged in Patient care 
2. To learn the routine functioning of the health Care System 
3. To gain practical and clinical skills 
4. To learn various Difficulties in the field through valuable experience 
5. To explore the broad field opportunities and engage in Specialization 
SEMESTER VIII INTERNSHIP & PROJECT WORK 
 
Course Outcome: 
 
1. To conduct High quality Sscientific research 
2. Ability to apply the excellent theoretical knowledge gained in the Academic career 
3. Pursue academic excellence through relevant research 
4. To identify existing research gaps 
5. Ability to engage in furtherance of the medical field 
 