M. Sc. Allied Health Sciences 
(Medical Imaging Technology) 
(w.e.f. 2025-26 admitted batch) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Structure and Syllabi 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                              
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
MURUKAMBATTU - CHITTOOR (Dt) 517127 
ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
SCHEME AND SYLLABUS 
PROGRAM OUTCOMES (PO) 
PO 1: Clinical care: Organize and implement the prescribed preventive, investigative and 
management plans; and will offer care and appropriate follow-up services to patients in a cost- 
effective way. 
 
PO 2: Communication: Communicate effectively and appropriately with patients/clients, 
caregivers, other health professionals and other members of the community. 
 
PO 3: Membership of a multidisciplinary health team: Function effectively as an individual, 
and as a member in multidisciplinary healthcare teams to accomplish shared goals within and 
across settings to achieve coordinated, high-quality care. 
 
PO 4: Ethics and accountability at all levels: Understand the core concept of clinical ethics and 
law so that they may apply these to their practice as healthcare service providers. 
 
PO 5: Commitment to professional excellence: Execute professionalism and reflect technical 
competence, appearance, empathy, compassion, honor, and integrity in his/her thought and 
action to ensure the safe delivery of healthcare. 
 
PO 6: Leadership and mentorship: Demonstrate leadership qualities where needed in order to 
ensure clinical productivity and patient satisfaction in an autonomous and confident manner. 
 
PO 7: Social accountability and responsibility: Recognize that allied health professionals need 
to judiciously manage resources and promote innovation and sustainability to provide optimal 
patient care in a socially responsible manner. 
 
PO 8: Scientific attitude and scholarship: To be engaged in evidence-based practice and need- 
based research studies and to apply and disseminate research findings and knowledge for 
improving the quality of care. 
 
PO 9: Lifelong learning: Recognize the need and have the ability to engage in independent and 
continuous lifelong learning and improvement in skills and knowledge while harnessing 
modern tools and technology for the advancement of self and profession. 
 
PROGRAM EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES (PEO): 
PEO1: Demonstrate technical proficiency, in-depth knowledge, and application of scientific 
and safety principles in all allied health professional programs and apply clinical skills to one’s 
own work, as a member and leader in a team, and in multidisciplinary clinical settings and to 
attain high level of proficiency in defined clinical competencies of the allied health 
technologists 
PEO2: Recognize that allied and healthcare professionals need to be advocates within the 
healthcare system, to judiciously manage resources and to acknowledge their social 
accountability. To serve the community, region and the nation and will hence direct all research 
and service activities towards addressing their priority health concerns. Have the ability to 
engage in independent and lifelong learning and improvement in skills and knowledge while 
harnessing modern tools and technology. 
PEO3: Practice with ethics and accountability at all levels (clinical, professional, personal, and 
social). To exhibit at all times a high level of professionalism and this be reflected in his/her 
thought and action, as well as in a range of attributes and characteristics that include technical 
competence, empathy, verbal and non-verbal communication, an anti-discriminatory and non- 
judgmental attitude. Communicate effectively and appropriately with patients/clients, 
caregivers, and health professionals. 
PEO4: Inculcate the skills to function effectively as an individual and as an active member of 
a multidisciplinary health team. Develop skills to take on a leadership role in order to ensure 
clinical productivity and patient satisfaction. Must be able to respond in an autonomous and 
confident manner to planned and uncertain situations and should be able to manage themselves 
and others effectively. 
 
PROGRAM SPECIFIC OUTCOMES (PSO): 
 
PSO1 Graduates will develop expertise in operating and optimizing advanced imaging 
modalities, including Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), 
Ultrasound, Nuclear Medicine, and Digital Radiography. They will be able to apply 
appropriate imaging techniques, contrast media administration, and radiographic positioning 
to acquire high-quality diagnostic images while minimizing artifacts and ensuring patient 
safety. 
 
PSO2 Graduates will demonstrate a strong understanding of radiation protection principles, 
safety protocols, and quality assurance procedures in medical imaging. They will be 
proficient in applying ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable) principles, radiation 
monitoring, shielding techniques, and regulatory compliance to ensure safe imaging 
practices for both patients and healthcare professionals. Additionally, they will develop the 
ability to conduct equipment calibration, functional tests, and corrective actions to 
maintain optimal system performance. 
 
 
PS03 Graduates will be equipped with biostatistical research skills, ethical decision-making 
capabilities, and pedagogical expertise in medical imaging education and healthcare 
management. They will be able to design, conduct, and analyze clinical research studies, 
evaluate diagnostic test accuracy, and publish scientific manuscripts adhering to ethical 
guidelines. Additionally, they will gain the ability to teach, assess, and mentor students or 
junior professionals in the field of radiology and imaging sciences. 
THE APOLLO UNIVERSITY 
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS 
 
SCOPE: 
This Academic regulation provide a framework for the regulatory guidelines of all programs 
offered by The Apollo University. It includes procedures and practices that are to be 
followed to ensure academic standards in the University. The regulations are approved by the 
Academic Council. These regulations may be amended from time to time with the approval of 
the Academic council for the benefit of students or sometimes to reflect the changes suggested 
by the statutory bodies. 
Information regarding amendments (if any) to the regulations will be communicated to the 
students by publishing in the University website. Students must follow the amended regulations 
as they might impact the process for the award of degree. The decision of the Vice Chancellor 
shall be the final in case of any discrepancy. These regulations apply to all students, despite the 
program of study. 
 
1. ADMISSION INTO THE PROGRAM 
The University admits the students in two modes. One through the convenor quota as per the 
Andhra Pradesh Private Universities Act, for which the admissions will be carried out through 
the convener quota by the Govt of Andhra Pradesh. The other is through University quota for 
which the following procedure will be followed: 
A. The applicant shall satisfy the entrance requirements specified by The Apollo University and 
in accordance with guidelines of statutory councils for various Under-graduation /Post- 
graduation /Doctor of Philosophy programs. 
B. The Applicant shall be qualified in the qualifying examination for a particular program. 
C. The Applicant secures a rank in national level entrance exam or suitable such test conducted by 
The Apollo University / professional body. 
D. The Applicant qualifies in the specified state or national level examinations prescribed by The 
Apollo University. 
 
The Apollo University will widely notify the counselling schedule for admissions into the 
academic programs in the media. The provisional admission will be given to the eligible 
students during the counseling scheduled by The Apollo University. The selected candidates 
will be provisionally admitted into the program of his/her choice if the candidate meets 
the program specific requirements in addition to academic performance qualifying 
exam. Admission is purely based on merit and so merely meeting the requirements will not 
ensure admission. The University does not discriminate based on gender, race, region, religion, 
disability or nationality. The University reserves the right to make admissions based on various 
criteria which is specified in the admission brochure. 
2. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
Undergraduate programs 
The qualifying exam eligibility for each program is given Annexure 1. The student should have 
passed the qualifying exam either in the year the student is seeking admission or the previous 
year. 
Convener Quota: The student seeking admission to any program under convener quota shall 
qualify in the relevant entrance exam conducted by the Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
University Quota: For getting admission under University quota, percentage of marks 
obtained in the qualifying exam, the rank obtained in TAU entrance exam or any recognized 
national level examination in the year of admission will be considered. 
Counselling 
All the eligible students need to apply for admission and have to attend counselling conducted 
by TAU as per the schedule for the university quota. 
 
3. PROGRAMS 
The Apollo University offers variety of programs which includes certificate, undergraduate, 
postgraduate, and Research. The list of programs on offer for the academic year 2023-24 are 
annexed in Annexure 2 and those of 2023-24 are annexed in Annexure 3. 
 
Minimum duration of the program 
The minimum duration of each program depends on the type of program, viz., undergraduate, 
postgraduate, integrated programs, etc., and the faculty which offers the program. The 
maximum duration of the program is N+2 years, where N stands for the minimum duration of 
the program as mentioned in Annexure 2 and 3. If the student has not obtained the minimum 
number of credits within the stipulated time, the Vice-Chancellor may extend the maximum 
duration in extenuating circumstances upon receiving a request along with reasons from the 
student for not completing the program on time. 
 
4. CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM 
The choice-based credit system (CBCS) facilitates the education student-centric. It provides the 
opportunity for the learner to choose the courses from a basket of core, elective, and skill 
enhanced courses. All programs of study are designed to meet the specified number of credit 
requirements. The courses taken by the student in each semester as part of program are allotted 
some credit points based on the number of hours assigned. Upon successful completion of the 
course, the student secures the number of credits allotted for that course. Once the minimum 
number of credits of the program is achieved, the degree can be awarded, subject to fulfillment 
of all other relevant conditions. 
 
5. STRUCTURE OF THE PROGRAM 
The Program structure Consists of 
i) University Courses 
A. University Core 
B. University Electives 
ii) Faculty Courses 
A. Faculty Core 
B. Faculty Electives 
iii) Program Courses 
A. Program Core 
B. Program electives 
Each course* is assigned a certain number of credits depending upon the number of contact 
hours (lectures/tutorials/practical) per week. (*one course means one subject) 
Core Courses = 3 Credit / 4 Credits Elective =3 Credits 
In general, credits are assigned to the courses as detailed below: 
 A classroom lecture/ tutorial of 60 min (1 hr) duration per week, spread over the entire 
semester, shall be considered as one credit. 
 A laboratory session of a minimum of 120 min (2 hr) per week shall be considered as one 
credit. 
 A project work/ Internship session of 60 minutes (1 hr) carried out per week shall be 
considered as one credit. 
 
6. MEDIUM OF INSTRUCTION 
The medium of instruction (including examinations and project reports) shall be English. 
 
7. REGISTRATION 
Any of the following student must register for the courses opted in a particular semester during 
the scheduled registration period. 
i. a new student who enrolls into any program 
ii. an existing student who is continuing on rolls from the preceding regular semester 
iii. a former student, i.e., who has not enrolled in the preceding regular semester or who has availed 
academic break or detained and got readmission 
 
Each newly admitted student shall attend an induction/ orientation program prior to 
commencement of the first semester. During this program academic advisors assist the 
students in choosing the courses. Existing students may register online by using their 
registration number and mail ID through the Apollo ERP portal. Class schedules are 
available approximately two weeks before the beginning of every semester for each program. 
The concerned head of the department must approve class schedule. 
 
8. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS 
 Students should earn a minimum of 80% attendance in the current semester to become eligible 
to write the Semester End examinations. 
 The monthly statement of attendance will be displayed on the Department Notice Board/ Apollo 
ERP by the respective departments within the first five working days of the following month. 
 Candidates who are falling short of 80% attendance will be detained on the recommendation of 
the HoD and are not eligible to appear for the current semester examinations. The students 
who are detained in the current semester will not be allowed to register for the next semester 
and they have to repeat the same semester by paying the tuition fee prescribed. However, they 
can write arrear subjects, if any. 
 
9. EVALUATION 
The assessment of the student’s performance in a Theory course shall be based on two 
components: Continuous Evaluation (40 marks) and Semester-end examination (60 marks). A 
student has to secure an aggregate of 40% in the course in the two components put together to 
be declared to have passed the course, subject to the condition that the candidate must have 
secured a minimum of 24 marks (i.e. 40%) in the theory component at the semester-end 
examination. Practical/ Project Work/ Industrial Training/ Viva voce/ Seminar etc. are 
completely assessed under Continuous Evaluation for a maximum of 100 marks, and a student 
has to obtain a minimum of 50% to secure Pass Grade. For courses having both theory and 
practical components, 60% of the weightage will be given for theory component and 40% 
weightage for practical component. The student must secure 40% (Theory + Practical) with 24 
marks minimum in theory to attain pass grade. 
Details of Assessment Procedure are furnished below in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Assessment Procedure 
S. No. Component of 
Assessment 
Marks 
Allotted 
Type of 
Assessment Scheme of Evaluation 
1 Theory 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
Continuous 
Evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Semester-end 
Examination 
i) Twenty (20) marks for 
mid examinations. Three mid 
examinations shall be conducted 
for 20 marks each; an average of 
the best two performances shall 
be taken into consideration. 
ii) Ten (10) marks for 
Quizzes, Assignments and 
Presentations. 
iii) Ten (10) marks for 
periodic evaluation ,case studies 
and projects 
iv) Sixty (60) marks for 
Semester-end examinations 
 Total 100   
2 Laboratory 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
1) 80 marks with equal weightage 
to all experiments subject to 
conduct of minimum of 10 
experiments 
2) 20marks for the end exam ( 
with one of our university 
teacher as external other than 
course teacher ) 
3 Project work 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
i) (80) Marks for periodic 
evaluation and technical report 
writing by the Project 
Supervisor. 
ii) Twenty (20)marks for final 
Report presentation and Viva- 
voce, by a panel of internal 
examiners 
4 Students Seminars 100 Continuous 
Evaluation 
Each student has to give a 
seminar on any topic in 
consultation with the faculty 
member in charge. A detailed 
report shall be submitted to the in 
charge. 
60 marks for periodic evaluation 
including report preparation and 
40 marks for viva voce by a 
panel of examiners. 
 
 
 
 
 
GRADING SYSTEM 
Based on the student performance during a given semester, a final letter grade will be awarded 
at the end of the semester in each course. The letter grades and the corresponding grade points 
are as given inTable2. 
 
Table 2: Grades & Grade Points 
 
Sl. No. Grade Grade Points Absolute Marks 
1 O(Outstanding) 10 90andabove 
2 A+(Excellent) 9 80 to 89 
3 A(Very Good) 8 70 to 79 
4 B+(Good) 7 60 to 69 
5 B(Above Average) 6 50 to 59 
6 C(Average) 5 45 to 49 
7 P(Pass) 4 40 to 44 
8 F(Fail) 0 Less than 40 
9 Ab.(Absent) 0 - 
 
SEMESTER GRADEPOINTAVERAGE (SGPA) 
A Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) for the semester will be calculated according to the 
formula: 
 
 
 
 
Were 
SGPA= ∑[ C xG ] 
—————— 
∑C 
C=number of credits for the course, 
G=grade points obtained by the student in the course. 
A student who earns a minimum of 4 grade points (P grade) in a course is declared to have 
successfully completed the course and is deemed to have earned the credits assigned to that 
course. 
CUMULATIVE GRADE POINT AVEARGE (CGPA) 
A similar formula is used to arrive at Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA), considering 
the student’s performance in all the courses taken in all the semesters up to the particular point 
of time. 
Table 3 shows the CGPA required for the award of class after the successful completion of the 
program. 
 
Table3:CGPA required for award of Class 
Class CGPA Required 
First Class with Distinction >8.0* 
First Class >6.5 
Second Class >5.5 
Pass Class >5.0 
*In addition to the required CGPA of 8.0 or more, the student must have necessarily passed all 
the courses of every semester in first attempt. 
 
11. REAPPEARANCE 
a. A student who has secured ‘F’ grade in a Theory course shall have to reappear at the subsequent 
Semester end examination held for that course. 
b. A student who has secured ‘F’ grade in a Practical course shall have to attend Special Instruction 
Classes scheduled by the Department for securing pass. 
c. A student who has secured ‘F’ Grade in Project work / Industrial Training etc. shall have to 
reappear for Viva – voce scheduled by the department. 
d. A student who is declared fail (F) in a course/s can apply for revaluation within one week from 
the date of publication of results with a fee prescribed by the university. The marks /grade 
awarded in the revaluation is final. 
 
11.1 Procedure for revaluation 
 The students who have not satisfied with the marks awarded by the examiner 
Can apply for revaluation of his/her answer script/s
 The students have to apply through proper channel for revaluation and to pay the revaluation 
fee per paper to the university towards revaluation fee.
 Students have to apply for revaluation within 7 days from the date 
Publication of result.
The scripts will get valued by second examiner and if the difference is more than 
15 marks, they will get valued by the third examiner. The average of the nearest 
two marks will be declared as the final marks. 
11.2 ASSESSMENT MECHANISM 
The Apollo University offers a student the benefits of Choice Based Credit System. 
Every paper is allotted a certain number of credits as per the UGC norms. A student is awarded 
the specified credits on obtaining a pass in the respective paper. 
 
The Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) has been adopted for all UG and PG Courses 
from the year 2021-22 onwards as per the recommendations of the A.P. State Council for 
Higher Education (APSCHE). The structure of undergraduate programmes provides a wide 
range of choice for students to opt for courses based on their eligibility, aptitude and career 
goals. 
 
11.3 Semester End Examination 
The End semester examination will be a comprehensive examination of 3 hours duration. Two 
End Semester examinations are conducted in a year- 
Odd semester examinations in November/ December and 
Even semester examination in May/June 
Practical examination / Project viva will be held 2 weeks prior to the theory semester end 
examinations. 
 
Under-Graduation Programs 
 
Course 
 
Continuous Assessment 
 
End semester 
Aggregate in End 
semester 
Examinations 
All UG 
Courses No passing minimum 40% 40% 
 
11.4 Post Evaluation Programme: 
Under the Post Evaluation Programme there are three menus: 
 Provision for improvement
 Re-totaling and Revaluation of answer scripts
 Restrictions to appear for the examinations
 
11.5 Provision for improvement 
A student who passes a paper in the first attempt can reappear for the same paper in the 
succeeding End-of-Semester examination only, for improving his/her marks. Re-appearance for 
improvement is allowed for theory and practical subjects of all semesters, except for the final 
semester subjects. A revised mark statement will be issued after withdrawing the previous one, 
if the marks obtained in improvement are higher than the marks awarded earlier. When there is 
no improvement, there shall not be any change in the original marks already awarded. The 
improved marks shall be considered for classification but not for ranking. 
Provision for Re-totaling and Revaluation of valued answer scripts 
 UG/PG candidates may apply for re-totaling / revaluation of valued answer scripts, to the 
Controller of Examinations through the Heads of Departments and Principal / Dean, in the 
prescribed forms, remitting the prescribed fee within 7 days from the date of publication of 
results. Revaluation of answer scripts is permissible only for the current semester papers and 
not for any arrear paper.
 Those who wish to apply for revaluation of final semester papers can do so within five days 
from the date of publication of results. In re-valuation, the answer papers will be valued by an 
external examiner and if there is a difference of 15 marks between the two evaluations then the 
script will be sent for third valuation which is final, and the mark awarded by the third examiner 
will be taken into the account.
 A revised mark statement will be issued after withdrawing the previous one, if the marks 
obtained in revaluation / retotaling are higher than the marks obtained earlier. In other cases, 
the original marks obtained earlier will be retained and the matter will be intimated to the 
student concerned as ‘No change’.
 A candidate who applies for revaluation should not apply for retotaling.
 
Restrictions to appear for the examinations 
Candidates who fail in any of the papers in the UG and PG End semester examinations shall 
complete the paper concerned within N+2 years from the date of admission to the particular 
course. If they fail to do so, they shall re-register their names and take the examination in the 
texts/revised regulations/syllabus of the paper prescribed for the subsequent batch of 
candidates, in force at the time of their reappearance. In the event of removal of that paper 
consequent to change of regulation and/or curriculum after N+2 years period, the candidate 
shall have to take up an equivalent paper in the revised syllabus as suggested by the Chairman, 
Board of Studies concerned. 
 
12. BETTERMENT OF GRADESA 
A student who has secured only a Pass or Second class and desires to improve his/her Class can 
appear for Betterment Examinations only in Theory courses of any Semester of his/her choice, 
conducted in Summer Vacation along with the Special Examinations. Betterment of Grades is 
permitted ‘only once’ immediately after completion of the program of study. 
 
13. DETENTION AND RE-ADMISSION 
If a student fails to meet the minimum attendance requirement or minimum standards for 
academic progression, the concerned academic head will recommend for detention, and it will 
be notified by the concerned Dean of the School. The students who are detained in the current 
semester will not be allowed to register for the next semester and they have to repeat the same 
semester. 
The candidates who are detained or availed academic break or suspended in the previous 
semester/academic year and want to continue their study shall apply for re-admission to the 
university. The candidates shall request for re-admission to the respective Head of the 
Department, with details viz., Full Name, Registration Number, Department, School, Fee 
payment particulars with proofs and reasons for discontinuations. The concerned academic 
head will forward it to the Registrar with specific comments. The Registrar will notify the 
decision of re-admission which shall include the prescribed fee particulars, semester/ year into 
which readmission is granted and additional courses to be completed by the student (if any). 
The candidates should apply for re-admission in advance that is before the commencement of 
the semester. 
14. GROOMING AND ATTIRE FOR STUDENTS 
Grooming and Etiquette is of great significance in the dynamic of shaping one’s Personality. 
The Apollo University stands by a Code of Grooming, Attire and Etiquette that promotes a 
professional standard: Academic Day; Campus Placements and Non-Academic Hours on 
Campus. 
The Dress Code to be in compliance on academic premises while attending: Formal Functions 
of the Institution / Lectures / Practicals / Dining Area / Library / Labs / Office Areas. 
Students shall follow appropriate attire during Academic and Non-Academic hours on the 
campus. Students shall wear clean, neat, pressed and presentable clothing, and command 
respect by dressing in accordance with responsible personal norms. Students shall always wear 
The Apollo University ID Card with the Lanyard. 
 
Grooming and Formal Wear - Boys: 
Formal Shirts / T-Shirts with a Collar should preferably be tucked in with a Formal pair of Pants 
Shoes and Socks to complete the Formal Attire. Personal Hygiene should be followed, and Hair 
should be well groomed. 
Smart Casuals for Boys: 
Long Kurtas / Formals / Semi-Formal Shirts with Jeans. 
Grooming and Formal Wear - Girls: Sarees / Salwar Suits / Leggings or Jeggings with Long 
Kurtis / Long Frocks / Long Skirts / Palazzos. Complement the outfit with proper footwear. 
Personal Hygiene should be followed, and Hair should be well groomed. 
Smart Casuals for Girls: 
Jeans with long Kurtis / Long Skirts / Long Frocks. 
Attire for Non-Academic Hours On Campus: 
The Students should be neatly attired during Non-Academic Hours on Campus. 
Dress Code for Boys: 
Jeans / Track Suits / T-Shirts / Trousers / Shirts. 
Dress Code for Girls: 
Jeans / T-Shirts or Blouses / Salwar Suits / Palazzos / Leggings or Jeggings with Long Tops / 
Sarees / Long Skirts / Track Suits. 
DO’S AND DO’NTS FOR BOYS AND GIRL STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY: 
 To wear modest clothing that reflects the essence of good personal grooming standards.
 To refrain from wearing Sleeveless Clothing; Shorts; Short Tops, etc.,
 
PLEASE NOTE: The decision as to what constitutes Appropriate Attire vests with the 
Authorities of The Apollo University. 
 
15. ELIGIBILITY FOR AWARD OF THE DEGREE 
The undergraduate degree will be of either 3- or 4-years of duration. Post-graduation programs 
may be of 2-years of duration for students who have completing 3-years or 4-years of 
Bachelor’s program. 
A student shall be declared as eligible for the award of the degree if the candidate has 
successfully secured the minimum number of required credits as specified in the curriculum 
corresponding to the branch of his/her study within the stipulated time. 
After successful completion of the program, a provisional certificate cum memorandum of 
grades (PCMG) will be issued to the students. The PCMG includes the secured grades and class 
achieved in chosen program and specialization if any, along with grades and CGPA secured by 
the student. The original degree will be presented in the subsequent convocation. 
 
16. DISCRETION POWER 
Not with-standing anything contained in the above sections, the Vice Chancellor may review 
all exceptional cases, and give his decision, which will be final and binding. 
 
 
ANNEXURE 1 
 
ELIGIBILTY FOR QUALIFYING EXAM FOR UNDER GRADUATE PROGRAMS 
 
Program 
Type 
Program Name Eligibility 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Masters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.Sc Medical Imaging 
Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Candidates must secure 50% in Bachelor of Imaging 
Sciences 
ANNEXURE 2 
PROGRAMS OFFERED BY SCHOOL OF HEALTH SCIENCES 
FROM ACADEMIC YEAR 2021-22 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Program 
 
Expanded 
 
Level 
Minimum 
Duration 
in Years (N) 
1 B.Sc. Anesthesiology & Operation Theatre 
Technology (AOT) Bachelor’s 3 
2 B.Sc. Emergency Medical Technology (EMT) Bachelor’s 3 
3 B.Sc. Imaging Technology (IMT) Bachelor’s 3 
4 B.Sc. Medical Laboratory Technology (MLT) Bachelor’s 3 
5 B. Optom Optometry (OPT) Bachelor’s 3 
6 B.Sc. Physician Assistant (PHA) Bachelor’s 3 
7 B.Sc. Renal Dialysis Technology (RDT) Bachelor’s 3 
8 B.Sc. Respiratory Therapy Technology (RTT) Bachelor’s 3 
ANNEXURE 3 
PROGRAMS OFFERED BY SCHOOL OF HEALTH SCIENCES 
FROM ACADEMIC YEAR 2022-23 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Program 
 
Expanded 
 
Level 
Minimum 
Duration 
in Years (N) 
Undergraduate Courses 
1 B.Sc. Anesthesiology & Operation Theatre 
Technology (AOT) Bachelor’s 3 
2 B.Sc. Biomedical Sciences (BMS) Bachelor’s 3 
3 B.Sc. Emergency Medical Technology (EMT) Bachelor’s 3 
4 B.Sc. Genetics and Molecular Biology (GMB) Bachelor’s 3 
5 B.Sc. Health Psychology Bachelor’s 3 
6 B.Sc. Imaging Technology (IMT) Bachelor’s 3 
7 B.Sc. Medical Laboratory Technology (MLT) Bachelor’s 3 
8 B.Sc. Occupational Therapy Bachelor’s 3 
9 B. 
Optom Optometry (OPT) Bachelor’s 3 
10 B.Sc. Physician Assistant (PHA) Bachelor’s 3 
11 B.Sc. Renal Dialysis Technology (RDT) Bachelor’s 3 
12 B.Sc. Respiratory Therapy Technology (RTT) Bachelor’s 3 
Post-Graduate Courses 
13 M.Sc. Clinical Psychology Master’s 2 
14 M.Sc. Health Informatics and Analytics (HI & A) Master’s 2 
15 MPH Public Health Master’s 2 
ANNEXURE 4 
PROGRAMS OFFERED BY SCHOOL OF HEALTH SCIENCES 
FROM ACADEMIC YEAR 2023-24 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Program 
 
Expanded 
 
Level 
Minimum 
Duration 
in Years (N) 
Undergraduate Courses 
1 B.Sc. Anesthesiology & Operation Theatre 
Technology (AOT) Bachelor’s 3 
2 B.Sc. Biomedical Sciences (BMS) Bachelor’s 3 
3 B.Sc. Emergency Medical Technology (EMT) Bachelor’s 3 
4 B.Sc. Genetics and Molecular Biology (GMB) Bachelor’s 3 
5 B.Sc. Health Psychology Bachelor’s 3 
6 B.Sc. Imaging Technology (IMT) Bachelor’s 3 
7 B.Sc. Medical Laboratory Technology (MLT) Bachelor’s 3 
8 B.Sc. Occupational Therapy Bachelor’s 3 
9 B. Optom Optometry (OPT) Bachelor’s 3 
10 BPT Physiotherapy Bachelor’s 4 
11 B.Sc. Physician Assistant (PHA) Bachelor’s 3 
12 B.Sc. Renal Dialysis Technology (RDT) Bachelor’s 3 
13 B.Sc. Respiratory Therapy Technology (RTT) Bachelor’s 3 
Post-Graduate Courses 
14 M.Sc. Clinical Psychology Master’s 2 
16 M.Sc. Health Informatics and Analytics (HI & A) Master’s 2 
17 MPT Physiotherapy Master’s 2 
18 MPH Public Health Master’s 2 
I – SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
MITT6501 Specialised radiographic Positioning 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT6502 Instrumentation of conventional & specialised 
radiology equipment 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT6503 Principles of Radiographic Exposure 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT6601 Biostatistics and Research Methodology 3 0 0 3 3 
MITL6501 Clinical Skills -1 0 0 16 8 16 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 
 -- 
Extra-Curricular Activity (sports & Club 
Activities) 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
2 
 -- 
Co-Curricular Activity (Seminars/Case 
discussions) 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
1 -- Total 12 3 16 23 36 
II – SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
MITT6504 Advanced tech and Instrumentation of 
Ultrasound 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT6505 Advanced tech and Instrumentation of 
Computed Tomography 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT6506 Specialised Radiographic Procedures 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT6602 Ethics and Pedagogy 3 0 0 3 3 
MITL6502 Clinical Skills -2 0 0 16 8 16 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 
 -- 
Extra-Curricular Activity (sports & Club 
Activities) 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
2 
 -- 
Co-Curricular Activity (Seminars/Case 
discussions) 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
1 -- Total 12 3 16 23 36 
III – SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
MITT7507 Advanced tech. & Instrumentation of MRI 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT7508 Care of patients in Diagnostic Radiology 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT7509 Nuclear medicine imaging technique 3 1 0 4 4 
MITP7501 Research Project and Viva 0 0 3 3 3 
MITL7503 Clinical skills 3 0 0 16 8 16 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 
 -- 
Extra -Curricular Activity (sports & Club 
Activities) 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
2 
 -- 
Co-Curricular Activity (Seminars/Case 
discussions) 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
1 -- Total 9 3 19 23 36 
IV – SEMESTER 
 
 
 
 
Course Code 
 
 
 
Course Name 
Periods 
per week 
Credits 
 
 
 
Hours 
per week L T P 
MITT7510 Interventional Radiology Techniques 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT7511 Radiation Safety and Protection 3 1 0 4 4 
MITT7603 Management of Healthcare Organisations 3 0 0 3 3 
MITP7502 Research Project and Viva 0 0 4 4 4 
MITL7504 Clinical skills 4 0 0 16 8 16 -- Mentoring 0 0 0 0 1 -- Library 0 0 0 0 1 
 -- 
Extra-Curricular Activity (sports & Club 
Activities) 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
2 
 -- 
Co-Curricular Activity (Seminars/Case 
discussions) 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
1 -- Total 9 2 20 23 36 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: I SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
 
Specialised radiographic Positioning L T P C 
MITT6501     
Paper-1 3 1 0 4 
 
Course Description 
This course provides in-depth knowledge and practical skills in radiographic positioning and 
imaging techniques for various anatomical regions. It covers general radiographic principles, 
osseous system positioning, vertebral column imaging, specialized radiography for the 
respiratory and gastrointestinal systems, and advanced techniques for skull imaging. 
Additionally, it includes bedside and theatre radiography, emphasizing the use of C-arm and 
image intensifiers. 
Course Objectives: 
 Upon completion of this course, students will:
 Understand patient positioning principles for high-quality diagnostic imaging.
 Develop proficiency in radiographic techniques for different anatomical structures.
 Learn to identify and adapt techniques for various pathological conditions.
 Gain expertise in bedside and trauma radiography.
 Understand the use of C-arm and image intensifiers in surgical and emergency settings.
 
Unit 1 General Principles of Radiographic Positioning 12 hrs 
 
 Age, sex, and anatomical variations, Postural differences (erect vs. horizontal techniques), 
Respiratory movements and diaphragm level considerations, Radiographic densities and 
patient preparation, Immobilisation techniques, Pathological conditions, injuries, fractures, and 
dislocations, Positioning terminology and identification systems
 
Unit 2 Radiographic Positioning – Osseous System 12hrs 
 
 Upper Limb: Fingers, thumb, hand, wrist, forearm, elbow, humerus, shoulder, and 
sternoclavicular joint
 Lower Limb: Foot, calcaneum, ankle joint, leg, knee, patella, femur (lower two-thirds)
 Pelvic Girdle: Pelvis, ilium, ischium, pubic bone, hip joint, and sacroiliac joint
 
Unit 3 Radiographic Positioning – Vertebral Column 12hrs 
 
 Atlanto-occipital articulation, Cervical vertebrae and cervico-thoracic junction, Thoracic 
vertebrae, Lumbar vertebrae and lumbo-sacral articulation, Sacrum and coccyx
 
Unit 4 Radiographic Positioning – Thoracic and Abdominal Systems 12 hrs 
 Respiratory System: Imaging techniques for lungs, sternum, and ribs (upper and lower)
 Gastrointestinal System: Routine abdominal radiographs and acute condition imaging
 Excretory System: KUB (Kidney, Ureter, Bladder) radiographs and acute urinary conditions
 
Unit 5 Skull, Beside and operation theatre radiography 12 hrs 
 
 Skull Imaging: Basic views of the cranium, facial bones, sella turcica, temporal bone, 
mastoids, optic foramina, sinuses, mandible, and temporomandibular joint
 Bedside Radiography: Techniques for acute chest conditions, intestinal obstructions, 
abdominal perforations, vertebral injuries, and immobilized fractures
 Theatre Radiography: Introduction to C-arm image intensifier, exposure control, and 
training
Course Learning Outcomes 
 Apply foundational and advanced principles of radiographic positioning, taking into account 
anatomical variations, patient posture, respiratory movement, and pathological conditions to 
ensure diagnostic accuracy.
 Demonstrate competence in performing radiographic procedures of the upper and lower limbs 
and pelvic girdle, selecting appropriate projections and ensuring correct alignment and patient 
safety.
 Conduct accurate radiographic imaging of the vertebral column, including specialized views 
of cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal regions, with the ability to modify 
techniques based on clinical indications.
 Perform imaging of thoracic and abdominal systems, applying protocols for routine and 
emergency evaluations of the lungs, sternum, ribs, gastrointestinal tract, and urinary system.
 Execute specialized skull imaging procedures, including cranial, facial, and sinus views, while 
critically assessing image quality and ensuring anatomical coverage.
Textbooks: 
 Ballinger, Philip W. – Merrill’s Atlas of Radiographic Positions and Radiologic Procedures
 Bontrager, Kenneth L. – Bontrager’s Textbook of Radiographic Positioning and Related 
Anatomy
 Long, Bruce W. – Radiographic Positioning and Related Anatomy
Reference Books: 
 Bushong, Stewart C. – Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection
 Clark, Colin G. – Clark’s Positioning in Radiography
 Whitley, Anthony S. – Clark’s Essential Physics in Imaging for Radiographers
 Carlton, Richard R. – Principles of Radiographic Imaging: An Art and a Science
 Sutton, David – Textbook of Radiology and Imaging
 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: I SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
 Instrumentation of conventional & Specialized Radiology 
equipment L T P C 
MITT6502     
 Paper 2 3 1 0 4 
 
Course Description 
This course provides a comprehensive understanding of the generation, distribution, and 
utilization of electrical energy in radiographic systems. It covers essential electrical principles, 
X-ray circuit components, generators, and exposure control systems. Students will learn about 
portable and mobile X-ray equipment, including their applications in operating theaters and 
emergency settings. The course also explores fluoroscopic imaging systems, digital 
fluoroscopy, image intensifiers, and radiographic tables, ensuring students gain expertise in the 
technical and operational aspects of radiographic equipment. 
 
Course Objectives 
 Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
 Understand the principles of electrical energy generation, distribution, and safety measures in 
radiology.
 Learn the construction, working, and importance of X-ray circuit components.
 Gain knowledge of different types of X-ray generators, switches, exposure timers, and safety 
devices.
 Develop expertise in portable and mobile X-ray equipment, including their operational 
requirements.
 Understand the working principles of fluoroscopy, image intensifiers, and radiographic tables.
 
Unit 1 Generation of electrical energy 12 hrs 
 
 AC/DC, Polyphase supply, Distribution of electrical energy, Use of electrical energy, Current 
loads & power loss, Uses of electricity in Hospitals, Safety rules for Radiographers
 
Unit 2 X ray Circuit components 12 hrs 
 
 High tension transformers, Main Voltage Compensation, High tension switches, Stabilisers and 
UPS, Fuses, Switches, Earthing, High tension cables construction & design, Rectification, 
Types of Rectifiers
 
Unit 3 X-ray circuits, Generators, Switches, Exposure timers 12 hrs 
 
 X-ray circuits: Filament circuits, High voltage circuits, Tube rating
 Generators: Types of Generators, Capacitor discharge generator, Battery Powered generators, 
Medium frequency & High frequency generators.
 Switches: Circuit breakers, Primary & Secondary switches, Exposure switching and its 
application, Interlocking Circuits, Regulating and safety devices, Magnetic relay, Thermal 
relay switches, Interlock in Tube Circuits and overload interlocks
 Exposure timers: Timing systems, Electronic timers, Ionization timers, Photo timers, 
Synchronous timers and impulse timers.
 
Unit 4 Portable & Mobile equipments 12 hrs 
 
 Portable & Mobile equipments
Main requirements: Cable connections to wall plugs, Portable X-Ray Equipment, Mobile X- 
Ray Equipment, Capacitor-Discharge Mobile Equipment, 
Cordless Mobile Equipment, X-Ray Equipment for the Operating Theatre, Mobile Image 
Intensifier units 
 
Unit 5 Fluoroscopy and Radiographic Equipment 12 hrs 
 
Fluoroscopy: 
 Construction & Working principles of Image Intensifier, Viewing the Intensified image, 
Recording the intensified Image, Digital fluoroscopy, Panel-type image intensifier. 
Fluoroscopic / Radiographic Tables:
 General features of fluoroscopic/radiographic table, the serial changer, the Remote control 
table, the spot film devices.
 
 
Course learning outcomes: 
After completing this course, students will be able to: 
1. Explain the fundamentals of electrical energy generation and distribution, including power loss 
and hospital applications. 
2. Identify and describe the components of X-ray circuits, including high-tension transformers, 
rectifiers, and stabilizers. 
3. Demonstrate knowledge of various X-ray generators, exposure timers, and safety mechanisms. 
4. Operate and troubleshoot portable and mobile X-ray equipment in different clinical settings. 
5. Understand and explain the construction, functioning, and advancements in fluoroscopy and 
radiographic tables. 
Textbooks: 
1. Bushong, S.C. – Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection 
(Latest Edition) 
2. Fauber, T.L. – Radiographic Imaging & Exposure (Latest Edition) 
3. Khan, F.M. – The Physics of Radiation Therapy (Latest Edition) 
Reference books: 
1. Clark, Colin G. – Clark’s Positioning in Radiography 
2. Whitley, Anthony S. – Clark’s Essential Physics in Imaging for Radiographers 
3. Carlton, Richard R. – Principles of Radiographic Imaging: An Art and a Science 
4. Sutton, David – Textbook of Radiology and Imaging 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: I SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Principles of Radiographic Exposure L T P C 
MITT6503     
Paper 3 3 1 0 4 
 
Course Description 
This course provides an in-depth study of X-ray interactions with matter, radiographic image 
formation, and the factors affecting image quality. Students will explore the principles of X- 
ray production, the photographic process, sensitometry, and radiographic density and contrast. 
The course also covers resolution, image un sharpness, magnification, and distortion in 
radiography. Additionally, students will gain knowledge about film processing techniques, 
automatic film processors, darkroom design, and quality control procedures to ensure optimal 
image quality in diagnostic radiology. 
 
Course Objectives 
1. Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
2. Understand the interactions of X-rays and gamma rays with matter and their clinical 
applications. 
3. Learn the fundamentals of the photographic process and sensitometry in radiographic imaging. 
4. Analyze the factors influencing radiographic image quality, including density and contrast. 
5. Gain knowledge about resolution, unsharpness, and geometrical aspects of the radiographic 
image. 
6. Understand the instrumentation of processing equipment, darkroom layout, and quality control 
procedures in radiographic imaging. 
 
Unit 1 Interaction of X-rays and gamma rays with matter 12 hrs 
 
 X-ray production, Interaction of radiation with matter- Compton effect, photoelectric effect, 
pair production, coherent scattering, Useful range and Clinical Application 
 
12 hrs 
 
 The Photographic process: Introduction, Basic review of photographic emulsions, 
Photographic latent image, Film materials, Spectral sensitivity of film material, Speed and 
contrast of photographic materials, Intensifying screens and cassettes, Film processing 
 Sensitometry: Photographic density, Opacity, Transmission, Production of Characteristic 
curve,Features of Characteristic curve, Variation in the characteristic curve with development, 
Unit 2 The Photographic Process and Sensitometry 
 
Comparison of emulsions by their characteristic curve, Application of Characteristic curve, 
Information from the Characteristic curve 
12 hrs 
 
Radiographic Density 
Acceptable range, Factors influence density, Radiographic Contrast, Components, Factors 
influences contrast, Management of Radiographic Image quality 
 
Unit 4 Resolution and Geometry of the radiographic image 12 hrs 
 
Resolution 
 Line spread function & Modulation transfer function, Unsharpness in the Radiographic image 
and various factors contributing towards Unsharpness, Types of Unsharpness, 
Radiographic mottle 
Geometry of the radiographic image: 
 Magnification / Distortion -Types and factors 
 Micro / Macro radiography 
 
Unit 5 Instrumentation of Processing Equipment 12hrs 
 
 Automatic film processor (AFP), Maintenance and Quality control tests in AFP, Layout and 
planning of the Darkroom, viewing accessories: viewing boxes, Magnifiers and viewing 
conditions. 
Course Outcomes 
After completing this course, students will be able to: 
1. Explain different types of X-ray interactions with matter and their effects on image formation. 
2. Describe the photographic process, including film materials, spectral sensitivity, and 
characteristic curves. 
3. Evaluate radiographic density, contrast, and factors affecting image quality. 
4. Demonstrate knowledge of radiographic resolution, unsharpness, magnification, and distortion. 
5. Operate and maintain automatic film processors, apply quality control measures, and optimize 
darkroom conditions for effective radiographic processing. 
Textbooks: 
1. Bushong, S.C. – Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection (Latest 
Edition) 
2. Fauber, T.L. – Radiographic Imaging & Exposure (Latest Edition) 
3. Chesney, D.N., & Chesney, M.O. – Radiographic Imaging 
4. Allisy-Roberts, P.J., & Williams, J. – Farr’s Physics for Medical Imaging 
Reference Books: 
1. Dowsett, D.J., Kenny, P.A., & Johnston, R.E. – The Physics of Diagnostic Imaging 
2. Klein, R.L. – Radiographic Equipment & Quality Control 
Unit 3 Radiographic Image 
 
3. Knoll, G.F. – Radiation Detection and Measurement 
4. Sprawls, P. – The Physical Principles of Medical Imaging 
 
 
 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: I SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Biostatistics and Research Methodology L T P C 
MITT6601     
Elective-1 3 0 0 3 
 
Course Description 
 This course introduces students to the fundamentals of biostatistics and its applications in 
health science research. The course covers essential statistical concepts, including measures of 
central tendency and dispersion, sampling techniques, correlation and regression analysis, and 
epidemiological study designs. Additionally, students will learn methods for evaluating 
diagnostic tests, measures of agreement, and the structure and format of scientific documents, 
such as research protocols and manuscripts for publication. The course provides the necessary 
statistical foundation for analyzing and interpreting healthcare data effectively. 
Course Objectives 
 Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 Understand the role of biostatistics in health science research and differentiate between 
qualitative and quantitative data. 
 Apply measures of central tendency and dispersion to summarize data effectively. 
 Gain knowledge of sampling techniques and their impact on statistical inference. 
 Analyze relationships between variables using correlation and regression techniques. 
 Interpret and apply epidemiological study designs to health-related research. 
 Evaluate the accuracy of diagnostic tests using sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values. 
 Develop structured scientific documents, including research protocols and manuscripts, for 
academic and professional purposes. 
 
Unit 1 Introduction to Biostatistics, Measures of Central Tendency & 
Dispersion 9 hrs 
 
 Introduction to biostatistics and uses of statistics in health science research. 
 Qualitative & quantitative variables and scales of measurements – definition, properties and 
examples. 
 Measures of central tendency: mean, median and mode – definition, situation of application 
and computation. 
 Quartiles and percentiles – definition and computation. 
 Measures of dispersion: range, quartile deviation, standard deviation, variance and coefficient 
of variation – definition, situation of application and computation. 
Unit 2 Sampling, Correlation and Regression 9hrs 
 
 Population, Sample, sampling, sampling frame – definition and examples. Characteristics of a 
good sample. Random and non-random sampling – definition and differences between two 
methods. Various methods of random sampling – simple, stratified, systematic, cluster and 
multistage random sampling techniques with merits, demerits and examples. Non-random 
sampling methods – Convenience, quota, judgment and snowball sampling. Parameter and 
statistic – definition, differences and examples. Sampling and non-sampling errors – definition, 
differences and methods to minimize these errors. 
 Correlation and Regression: Scatter diagrams, Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation 
coefficient – interpretation, properties, and assumptions (no computation). Introduction to 
simple linear and multiple linear regression – situation of application, assumptions, 
interpretation of coefficients and coefficient of determination. 
 
Unit 3 Epidemiological Study Designs 9hrs 
 
 Rate, ratio and proportion. Incidence and prevalence rates – definition and computation. 
Descriptive epidemiological methods: case report, case series analysis and prevalence studies 
and ecological studies – design, merits and demerits of each of these studies 
 Analytical epidemiological methods: case control (unmatched and 1:1 matched design) and 
cohort studies – design, analysis (2x2 table and odds ratio/relative risk), merits and demerits. 
Clinical trials/intervention studies – design, randomization methods (simple, block and 
stratified), blinding, analysis, merits and demerits. 
 
Unit 4 Measures of Agreement and Evaluation of Diagnostic Tests 9 hrs 
 
 Validity: Sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV – definition and computation. Measures of 
agreement: Bland Altman plot, Kappa statistic – definition and importance (no computation). 
 
Unit 5 Format of Scientific Documents 9 hrs 
 
 
Structure of research protocol, structure of thesis/research report, formats of reporting in 
scientific journals (uniform requirements for manuscripts). 
Course Outcomes: 
After completing this course, students will be able to: 
1. Define and apply statistical measures such as mean, median, mode, variance, and standard 
deviation in research data analysis. 
2. Identify appropriate sampling techniques for different research scenarios and understand their 
advantages and limitations. 
3. Interpret correlation coefficients and regression models in biomedical research studies. 
4. Differentiate between descriptive and analytical epidemiological study designs and apply them 
to real-world health science problems. 
5. Compute and analyze sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of diagnostic tests. 
6. Construct well-organized research documents following scientific writing guidelines for 
publication. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Daniel, W.W., & Cross, C.L. – Biostatistics: A Foundation for Analysis in the Health Sciences 
(Latest Edition) 
2. Rosner, B. – Fundamentals of Biostatistics (Latest Edition) 
3. Pagano, M., & Gauvreau, K. – Principles of Biostatistics 
4. Dawson, B., & Trapp, R.G. – Basic and Clinical Biostatistics 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Katz, M.H. – Study Design and Statistical Analysis: A Practical Guide for Clinicians 
2. Szklo, M., & Nieto, F.J. – Epidemiology: Beyond the Basics 
3. Altman, D.G. – Practical Statistics for Medical Research 
4. Hulley, S.B., Cummings, S.R., Browner, W.S., Grady, D.G., & Newman, T.B. – Designing 
Clinical Research 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: I SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Clinical skills I L T P C 
MITL6501     
 0 0 16 8 
 
Course Description 
 This course introduces students to the fundamentals of biostatistics and its applications in 
health science research. The course covers essential statistical concepts, including measures of 
central tendency and dispersion, sampling techniques, correlation and regression analysis, and 
epidemiological study designs. Additionally, students will learn methods for evaluating 
diagnostic tests, measures of agreement, and the structure and format of scientific documents, 
such as research protocols and manuscripts for publication. The course provides the necessary 
statistical foundation for analyzing and interpreting healthcare data effectively. 
Course Objectives 
 Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 Understand the role of biostatistics in health science research and differentiate between 
qualitative and quantitative data. 
 Apply measures of central tendency and dispersion to summarize data effectively. 
 Gain knowledge of sampling techniques and their impact on statistical inference. 
 Analyze relationships between variables using correlation and regression techniques. 
 Interpret and apply epidemiological study designs to health-related research. 
 Evaluate the accuracy of diagnostic tests using sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values. 
 Develop structured scientific documents, including research protocols and manuscripts, for 
academic and professional purposes. 
 
Unit 1 Contrast Media & Specialized Radiographic Procedures 30 hrs 
 
 Preparation and administration of contrast media (Ionic & Non-ionic) 
 Patient positioning and technique for: 
 Barium Swallow & Barium Meal 
 Barium Meal Follow Through & Enteroclysis 
 Barium Enema 
 IVU (Intravenous Urogram), MCU (Micturating Cystourethrogram), ASU (Ascending 
Urethrogram) 
 HSG (Hysterosalpingography) and Fallopian Tube Recanalization (FTR) 
 ERCP (Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography) & PTBD (Percutaneous 
Transhepatic Biliary Drainage) 
 T-tube Cholangiography, Sialography, Dacrocystography, Sinography, and Fistulography 
 Management of patients with adverse reactions to contrast media 
 
Unit 2 Dental Radiography & Mammography 30 hrs 
 
Dental Radiography 
 Intraoral Techniques: Periapical, Bitewing, and Occlusal views 
 Extraoral Techniques: OPG (Orthopantomogram) and Lateral Cephalometry 
 Radiation protection techniques in dental radiography 
 Checking of mains supply and exposure parameter selection 
Mammography 
 Patient preparation and positioning for CC (Craniocaudal) and MLO (Mediolateral Oblique) 
views 
 Digital Mammography and Breast Tomosynthesis 
 Understanding and application of BIRADS classification 
 Stereotactic biopsy procedure demonstration 
 
Unit 3 X-ray Circuit Components & Equipment Handling 30 hrs 
 
1. Identification and function of: 
o High Tension Transformers, Voltage Stabilizers, Rectifiers 
o High Tension Cables, Circuit Breakers, Magnetic Relays 
o Exposure Timers: Electronic, Ionization, Photo Timers 
2. Handling of Portable and Mobile X-ray equipment 
o Operating theater and emergency room imaging techniques 
o Mobile Image Intensifier units 
3. Hands-on training on Fluoroscopic Systems: 
o Image Intensifier functioning 
o Viewing and recording fluoroscopic images 
o Digital fluoroscopy and Panel-type image intensifiers 
 
Unit 4 Principles of Radiographic Exposure & Image Quality 30 hrs 
 
 Practical demonstration of: 
o X-ray interactions with matter: Compton effect, Photoelectric effect, Pair production 
o Measurement of Radiographic Density and Contrast 
o Effect of exposure parameters on image quality 
 Evaluation of Radiographic Resolution & Unsharpness: 
o Line Spread Function & Modulation Transfer Function 
o Factors influencing radiographic mottle and unsharpness 
 Image Geometry: 
o Magnification and distortion techniques 
o Application of Micro and Macro Radiography 
 Validity: Sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV – definition and computation. Measures of 
agreement: Bland Altman plot, Kappa statistic – definition and importance (no computation). 
 
Unit 5 Film Processing & Quality Control Procedures 30 hrs 
 
1. Operation and Maintenance of Automatic Film Processor (AFP) 
2. Darkroom Layout Planning and Maintenance 
3. Quality Control Tests in: 
 Film-screen combination 
 Processing systems 
 Viewing accessories (viewing boxes, magnifiers) 
4. Film Analysis: 
 Characteristic Curve (Sensitometry) 
 Interpretation of radiographic image artifacts 
 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Bushong, S.C. – Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection (Latest 
Edition) 
2. Fauber, T.L. – Radiographic Imaging & Exposure (Latest Edition) 
3. Chesney, D.N., & Chesney, M.O. – Radiographic Imaging 
4. Allisy-Roberts, P.J., & Williams, J. – Farr’s Physics for Medical Imaging 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: II SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Advanced tech and Instrumentation of Ultrasound L T P C 
MITT6504     
Paper 1 3 1 0 4 
 
Course Description 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of ultrasound imaging, covering fundamental 
principles, transducer technology, instrumentation, Doppler imaging, and various advanced 
ultrasound techniques. The course emphasizes both theoretical concepts and practical 
applications, ensuring students develop proficiency in ultrasound imaging for medical 
diagnostics. 
Course Objectives 
 To understand the basic physics and properties of ultrasound waves.
 To learn about transducer technology and different types of ultrasound transducers.
 To gain knowledge about ultrasound imaging instrumentation and display techniques.
 To explore Doppler imaging principles and advanced ultrasound techniques.
 To understand safety considerations, bio-effects, quality assurance, and interventional 
applications of ultrasound.
 
12 hrs 
 
 Introduction to sound waves and ultrasound properties, Interaction of ultrasound with matter, 
Piezoelectric effect and piezoelectric materials, Transducer construction and types of 
transducers, Advances in modern ultrasound transducer technology
 
12 hrs 
 
 Display modes: A-mode, B-mode, M-mode, Gray-scale imaging and real-time ultrasound, 
Pulse echo imaging,Instrumentation: Beam former, pulse transmitter-receiver, CRT displays, 
Image storage: scan converter memory, photographic film, computer storage
 
12 hrs 
 
 Doppler principles and instrumentation, Continuous wave and pulsed Doppler, Duplex 
scanning and spectral analysis, Color flow imaging, power Doppler, and harmonic 
imaging,Extended field of view and real-time compounding,Ultrasound contrast agents and 
their applications,
Unit 1 Basics of Ultrasound Physics and Transducer Technology 
 
Unit 2 Ultrasound Imaging Systems and Display Techniques 
 
Unit 3 Doppler Imaging and Advanced Ultrasound Techniques 
 
Unit 4 Image Quality, Artifacts, and Safety Considerations 12 hrs 
 
 Image characteristics and artifacts in ultrasound imaging, Tissue characterisation and organ 
dynamics, Bio-effects of ultrasound and safe usage considerations, Ultrasound equipment 
quality assurance and performance evaluation, Doppler system quality assurance.
 
Unit 5 Specialized Ultrasound Applications and Protocols 12 hrs 
 
 
 Interventional and intraoperative ultrasound, Ophthalmic ultrasound and elastography, 3D 
and 4D ultrasound imaging, Emergency ultrasound applications,Pre-conceptual and prenatal 
diagnostic techniques,Pediatric, obstetric, musculoskeletal ultrasound,Ultrasound and 
Doppler protocols
Course Outcomes 
After completing this course, students will be able to: 
1. Explain different types of X-ray interactions with matter and their effects on image formation. 
2. Describe the photographic process, including film materials, spectral sensitivity, and 
characteristic curves. 
3. Evaluate radiographic density, contrast, and factors affecting image quality. 
4. Demonstrate knowledge of radiographic resolution, unsharpness, magnification, and distortion. 
5. Operate and maintain automatic film processors, apply quality control measures, and optimize 
darkroom conditions for effective radiographic processing. 
 
Textbooks : 
1. Rumack, C. M., Wilson, S. R., Charboneau, J. W., & Levine, D. - Diagnostic Ultrasound, 
Elsevier 
2. Kremkau, F. W. - Sonography Principles and Instruments, Elsevier 
3. Hagen-Ansert, S. L. - Textbook of Diagnostic Ultrasonography, Elsevier 
4. Miele, F. R. - Ultrasound Physics and Instrumentation, McGraw Hill 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Goldberg, B. B., & Kurtz, A. B. - Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology, Thieme 
2. Baker, P. - Doppler Ultrasound in Cardiology and Radiology, Springer 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: II SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Advanced tech and Instrumentation of Ultrasound L T P C 
MITT6505     
Paper 2 3 1 0 4 
 
Course Description 
This course provides a comprehensive understanding of computed tomography (CT), covering 
fundamental principles, imaging techniques, instrumentation, and clinical applications. It 
includes discussions on image formation, quality assurance, and advanced CT techniques such 
as angiography, perfusion imaging, and cardiac CT. Emphasis is placed on radiation safety, 
patient care, and emerging technologies in CT imaging. 
Course Objectives 
 Understand the principles and physics of computed tomography.
 Describe CT instrumentation, including detectors, slip-ring technology, and multi-slice 
imaging.
 Analyze CT image formation, display techniques, and post-processing methods.
 Recognize and address artifacts in CT images and ensure optimal image quality.
 Apply advanced CT techniques in clinical practice, including angiography, perfusion, and 
cardiac imaging.
 Understand patient radiation safety and quality assurance measures in CT imaging.
 
12 Hrs 
 
 Imaging principles in CT, CT scan instrumentation, History of Computer Tomography,
Basic tomography principle and its types, Generations of computer tomography, Advances in 
detector technology, Slip ring technology, Helical CT, Single-slice and multi-slice CT scan 
systems. 
 
12 hrs 
 
 Isotropic imaging, Image display techniques, Image reconstruction technique, Pre and post- 
processing techniques, Image quality in single-slice and multi-slice helical CT scans, Patient 
radiation dose considerations in CT imaging.
 
Unit 3 CT Protocols and High-Resolution CT (HRCT) 12hrs 
 
 Whole-body CT protocols for adults and pediatric patients, Documentation and artifact 
recognition, HRCT of lungs and temporal bone, technical aspects of HRCT, Volumetric and 
expiratory HRCT, HRCT protocols, Artifacts
Unit 1 Fundamentals of Computed Tomography 
 
Unit 2 Image Formation and Quality Assessment 
 
12 hrs 
 
 CT angiography and fluoroscopy, Multidimensional reformations (MPR, Curved MPR, MIP), 
3d imaging and 4d CT, CT perfusion scanning, Dentascan, CT colonoscopy and bronchoscopy, 
DICOM processing,Picture archiving and communication system (PACS) applications
 
12 hrs 
 
 
 CT coronary angiography, CT calcium scoring, Myocardial imaging, General care and 
maintenance of CT systems, Functional tests and quality assurance, Acceptable limits of 
variation and corrective actions.
Course Outcomes 
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand the fundamental principles and technological advancements in CT imaging. 
2. Operate CT equipment and implement image acquisition techniques. 
3. Analyze and optimize image quality while minimizing radiation dose. 
4. Apply CT protocols effectively in clinical practice. 
5. Perform quality assurance procedures and ensure safe operation of CT systems. 
 
Textbooks 
 Computed Tomography – Physical Principles, Clinical Applications & Quality Control by 
Euclid Seeram 2. Computed Tomography by Stewart C. Bushong 
 
Reference Books: 
 Mahesh, M. (2018). CT Imaging: Fundamentals and Advances. Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins. 
 Kalra, M. K., & Padole, A. (2020). Radiation Dose Optimization in CT: Current and Emerging 
Strategies. Springer. 
 Brink, J. A., & Morin, R. L. (2018). Dose, Image Quality and Radiation Protection in CT. 
Springer. 
 Van der Molen, A. J., & Geleijns, J. (2019). Computed Tomography: Principles, Design, 
Artifacts, and Recent Advances. Springer. 
Unit 4 Advanced CT Imaging Techniques 
 
Unit 5 Cardiac Imaging, Maintenance, and Quality Assurance 
 
AHS IMT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: II SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Specialised Radiographic Procedures L T P C 
MITT6506     
Paper 3 3 1 0 4 
 
 
 
 Course Description 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of contrast media, specialized radiographic 
procedures, and imaging techniques in diagnostic radiology. It covers the principles of contrast 
media usage, adverse reactions, and patient management. The course also explores imaging of 
the digestive, genitourinary, and biliary systems, along with specialized radiographic 
procedures such as sialography, sinography, and fistulography. Additional modules focus on 
dental radiography, mammography, and advancements in imaging technologies, ensuring 
students develop the necessary skills for safe and effective diagnostic imaging. 
 
 
 Course Objectives 
1. Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
2. Understand the types, administration methods, and reactions of contrast media. 
3. Gain knowledge of anatomical structures, associated pathologies, and radiographic 
appearances of the digestive, genitourinary, and biliary systems. 
4. Learn and apply specialized imaging techniques such as ERCP, PTBD, sialography, and 
fistulography. 
5. Develop competency in dental radiography, including intraoral, extraoral, and occlusal 
imaging. 
6. Understand the principles, techniques, and advancements in mammography, including digital 
mammography and breast tomosynthesis. 
 
Unit 1 Contrast Media 12 hrs 
 
 Contrast media introduction – types – ionic and non-ionic contrast media, positive and 
negative, Contrast media – modes of administration, Adverse reactions to contrast medium, 
Management of patients with adverse reactions.
Unit 2 Digestive and Genito urinary system 12 hrs 
 
Digestive system: 
 Anatomy and physiology, Associated pathology and radiographic appearance, Plain 
radiography, Barium swallow, Barium meal, Barium meal follow-through, Enteroclysis, 
Barium enema
Genito urinary system: 
 Anatomy and physiology, Associated pathology and radiographic appearance, Plain 
radiography, Intravenous urogram (IVU), Micturating Cystourethrogram (MCU), ascending 
Urethrogram (ASU), Hysterosalpingography (HSG), Fallopian Tube Re-canalisation (FTR)
 
12 hrs 
 
Biliary and System: 
 Related anatomy, Associated pathology and radiographic appearance, ERCP/ PTBD, T–tube 
cholangiography
Miscellaneous System: 
 Sialography, Dacrocystography, Sinography, Fistulography
 
Unit 4 Dental Radiography 12 hrs 
 
 Dental radiography, related anatomy, associated pathology and their radiographic appearances, 
intraoral, extraoral and occlusal views, orthopantomogram (OPG), checking of mains supply 
and equipment functionality, selection of exposure parameters, and radiation protection.
 
Unit 5 Mammography 12 hrs 
 
 Anatomy and physiology, indications, contraindications, and techniques as per ICRP 
guidelines, immobilization and identification techniques, mammographic positioning and 
various modified projections, BIRADS classification, digital mammography (DR), breast 
tomosynthesis and its procedure, recent advances in mammography techniques including 
sono-mammography with their advantages and limitations, and the procedure for stereotactic 
biopsy.
 
Course outcomes: 
After completing this course, students will be able to: 
 Classify and evaluate various contrast media, including their types, routes of administration, 
indications, adverse reactions, and appropriate emergency management strategies.
 Perform specialized radiographic procedures for the digestive and genitourinary systems, 
interpreting anatomical structures, identifying pathological conditions, and demonstrating 
proficiency in procedures like barium studies, IVU, MCU, ASU, and HSG.
Unit 3 Biliary and Miscellaneous System 
 
 Execute advanced imaging procedures of the biliary and miscellaneous systems, including 
ERCP, PTBD, T-tube cholangiography, sialography, fistulography, and dacryocystography, 
with emphasis on anatomical localization and radiographic appearances.
 Apply principles of dental radiography by performing intraoral, extraoral, and occlusal 
imaging, ensuring accurate exposure selection, equipment calibration, and radiation protection 
in compliance with safety standards.
 Demonstrate proficiency in mammographic techniques, including breast positioning, image 
interpretation using BIRADS, and application of recent technologies such as digital 
mammography, breast tomosynthesis, and sono-mammography.
 Critically evaluate patient-specific factors and clinical indications to select, perform, and 
interpret appropriate specialized radiographic procedures, integrating anatomical knowledge, 
pathology, and current imaging advancements.
 
Text book: 
 Bushong, S.C. – Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection 
(Latest Edition)
 Ballinger, P.W., & Frank, E.D. – Merrill’s Atlas of Radiographic Positions and Radiologic 
Procedures (Latest Edition)
 Bontrager, K.L., & Lampignano, J.P. – Textbook of Radiographic Positioning and Related 
Anatomy (Latest Edition)
 Hall, E.J., & Giaccia, A.J. – Radiobiology for the Radiologist (Latest Edition)
 Peart, O. – Mammography and Breast Imaging Prep
 
Reference book: 
 Brant, W.E., & Helms, C.A. – Fundamentals of Diagnostic Radiology
 Thilander-Klang, A., & Aps, J.K. – Textbook of Dental Radiology
 Graham, D.T., Cloke, P., & Vosper, M. – Principles and Applications of Radiological Physics
 Wilkinson, M. – Essential Physics for Radiographers
ICRP Publications – ICRP Guidelines on Radiation Protection 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: II SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Ethics and Pedagogy L T P C 
MITT6602     
Paper 4 3 0 0 3 
 
 
 
Course Description 
This course provides a comprehensive understanding of research and professional ethics, 
focusing on ethical guidelines in medical research, informed consent, and publication ethics. It 
also introduces principles of clinical and professional ethics, followed by an in-depth 
exploration of pedagogical techniques, including adult learning principles, teaching-learning 
methods, and assessment strategies. 
 
Course Objectives 
 To understand ethical guidelines in medical research and professional practice.
 To explore the roles and responsibilities of institutional ethics committees (IEC).
 To analyze principles of adult learning and various educational methodologies.
 To develop competency in teaching-learning techniques and assessment methods.
 To integrate ethical considerations and pedagogy in medical imaging education.
 
Unit 1 Research Ethics and Guidelines 9 hrs 
 
Research Ethics: 
 Ethical considerations in medical research
 Importance of research integrity 
ICMR Guidelines:
 Ethical principles in biomedical and health research
 Human and animal research ethics 
Informed Consent Process:
 Components of informed consent
 Ethical concerns and challenges
Roles & Responsibilities of Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC) 
Publication Ethics: 
 Plagiarism and misconduct
 Authorship and conflicts of interest
 
Unit 2 Clinical and Professional Ethics 9 hrs 
 
Principles of Ethics: 
 Autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence, and justice 
Ethics in Professional Practice:
 Ethical dilemmas in clinical settings
 Ethical responsibilities of healthcare professionals
 Confidentiality and patient rights
 
Unit 3 Educational Philosophy and Learning Theories 9 hrs 
 
 
 Principles of Adult Learning
 Types of Education:
 Online, Distance, and Conventional Learning
 Systems Approach in Education
 Taxonomy of Learning:
 Bloom’s Taxonomy and Miller’s Pyramid
 Learning Approaches:
 Outcome-Based, Competency-Based, and Objective-Based Education
 Scholarship of Teaching and Learning
 
Unit 4 Teaching and Learning Methods 9 hrs 
 
 Classroom Teaching-Learning (TL) Methods
 Clinical and Laboratory Teaching Methods
 Use of Technology in TL Methods:
 E-learning and virtual simulations
 AI-based learning tools
 
Unit 5 Assessment Strategies in Medical Education 9 hrs 
 
 Principles of Assessment in Higher Education
 Curricular Alignment and Blueprinting
 Question Paper Blueprint:
 Structuring assessments for validity and reliability
 Question Types and Evaluation Methods
Course Learning Outcomes 
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand research ethics and adhere to ethical guidelines in biomedical studies. 
2. Apply ethical principles in professional and clinical practice. 
3. Implement effective teaching-learning methodologies in medical education. 
4. Utilize educational technology to enhance learning experiences. 
5. Design and evaluate assessment tools aligned with educational objectives. 
 
Textbooks: 
 ICMR. (2023). Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on Human Participants. Indian 
Council of Medical Research.
 Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (2021). Principles of Biomedical Ethics. Oxford 
University Press.
 Harden, R. M., & Laidlaw, J. M. (2020). Essential Skills for a Medical Teacher: An Introduction 
to Teaching and Learning in Medicine. Elsevier.
 
Reference Books: 
 National Bioethics Committee Reports (Latest editions).
 Biggs, J., & Tang, C. (2019). Teaching for Quality Learning at University. Open University 
Press.
 McKeachie, W. J., & Svinicki, M. D. (2020). McKeachie's Teaching Tips: Strategies, Research, 
and Theory for College and University Teachers. Cengage Learning.
 WHO Guidelines on Research Ethics (Latest edition).
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
I YEAR: II SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Clinical skills 2 L T P C 
MITL6502     
 0 0 16 8 
 
Course Description 
This course is designed to provide hands-on experience in ultrasound imaging, computed 
tomography (CT), radiation safety, digital image processing, and advanced imaging 
techniques. Students will learn to operate imaging equipment, optimize image acquisition, 
ensure radiation safety compliance, and apply quality assurance measures. The course 
emphasizes technical skills, clinical application, and critical analysis of medical imaging data 
for accurate diagnosis and patient care. 
Course Objectives: 
 Develop technical proficiency in operating ultrasound, CT, and digital imaging systems.
 Understand and apply radiation protection principles in medical imaging.
 Optimize imaging parameters to improve diagnostic accuracy and reduce artifacts.
 Demonstrate competence in quality assurance protocols for different imaging modalities.
 Analyze and interpret medical images, ensuring adherence to clinical protocols.
 Utilize digital image processing and PACS for efficient image management.
 Engage in problem-solving through case-based discussions and practical applications.
 
Unit 1 Ultrasound Imaging 30 hrs 
 
 operation and handling of ultrasound machines
 Transducer selection and application for different examinations
 Doppler imaging techniques (color Doppler, power Doppler)
 Image optimization: adjusting gain, depth, focus, and TGC
 Scanning techniques for abdominal, obstetric, and musculoskeletal ultrasound
 
Unit 2 Computed Tomography (CT) 30 hrs 
 
 Understanding CT console operation and patient positioning
 CT protocol selection for different clinical indications
 Image reconstruction techniques (MPR, MIP, 3D rendering)
 Radiation dose optimization and ALARA principles in CT
 Evaluation of CT image quality and artifact recognition
30 hrs 
 
 Radiation measuring instruments: dosimeters, survey meters
 Shielding techniques and room design evaluation
 Quality control tests for radiographic and fluoroscopic systems
 Radiation dose measurement and analysis in different imaging modalities
 Hands-on training on personal protective equipment (PPE) and lead aprons
 
Unit 4 Digital Image Processing and PACS 30 hrs 
 
 Image processing techniques: contrast enhancement, edge detection
 DICOM image handling and manipulation
 PACS workflow and image archiving principles
 Post-processing techniques in CT and MRI
 Artifact reduction strategies in digital imaging
 
Unit 5 Advanced Imaging Techniques and Quality Assurance 30 hrs 
 
 Hands-on experience with MRI sequences and contrast imaging
 QA and maintenance of ultrasound, CT, and MRI systems
 Phantoms and test tools for quality control assessment
 Application of AI in medical imaging
 Case-based discussions on complex imaging scenarios
Course Learning Outcomes 
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 Operate ultrasound, CT, and digital imaging systems efficiently in clinical settings.
 Apply radiation safety measures to protect patients, healthcare professionals, and the 
environment.
 Optimize image quality while minimizing artifacts and radiation exposure.
 Perform quality control tests on imaging equipment and ensure compliance with safety 
regulations.
 Utilize DICOM and PACS for image storage, retrieval, and processing.
 Conduct advanced imaging techniques, including Doppler ultrasound, 3D/4D imaging, and CT 
angiography.
 Demonstrate critical thinking and problem-solving in real-world imaging scenarios.
 
Textbooks: 
 Bushong, S. C. – Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection
(Elsevier) 
 Seeram, E. – Computed Tomography: Physical Principles, Clinical Applications & Quality 
Control (Elsevier)
Unit 3 Radiation Safety and Protection 
 
 Hagen-Ansert, S. L. – Textbook of Diagnostic Ultrasonography (Elsevier)
 Kremkau, F. W. – Sonography Principles and Instruments (Elsevier)
 Martin, C. J., & Sutton, D. G. – Practical Radiation Protection in Healthcare (Oxford 
University Press)
 
Reference Books: 
 ICRP Publications (Latest Editions) – Recommendations of the International Commission on 
Radiological Protection
 Brink, J. A., & Morin, R. L. – Dose, Image Quality, and Radiation Protection in CT (Springer)
 Kalra, M. K., & Padole, A. – Radiation Dose Optimization in CT: Current and Emerging 
Strategies (Springer)
 Miele, F. R. – Ultrasound Physics and Instrumentation (McGraw Hill)
 Turner, J. E. – Atoms, Radiation, and Radiation Protection (Wiley)
 Van der Molen, A. J., & Geleijns, J. – Computed Tomography: Principles, Design, Artifacts, 
and Recent Advances (Springer)
 Knoll, G. F. – Radiation Detection and Measurement (Wiley)
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
II YEAR: III SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Advanced tech. & Instrumentation of MRI L T P C 
MITT7507     
Paper-1 3 1 0 4 
 
 
 
 
Course Description 
 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), 
including its fundamental principles, instrumentation, pulse sequences, image formation, 
contrast agents, clinical protocols, safety aspects, and advanced imaging techniques. It covers 
specialized applications in cardiac, musculoskeletal, and functional MRI (fMRI) and 
emphasizes quality assurance and system maintenance. The course is designed to equip 
students with the theoretical and practical knowledge required for proficient MRI operation 
and interpretation. 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
 Understand the basic principles of MRI, including spin, precession, relaxation times, and pulse 
sequences.
 Gain knowledge of MRI system components, including magnets, RF coils, gradients, and 
shielding techniques.
 Learn about image formation processes, including Fourier transformation, K-space 
representation, and 3D imaging.
 Explore pulse sequences and their role in clinical imaging.
 Understand the use of MRI contrast agents, MR angiography, and MR spectroscopy.
 Learn clinical MRI protocols for different body systems and recognize common artifacts.
 Develop expertise in specialized MRI techniques, such as cardiac MRI, musculoskeletal MRI, 
and fMRI.
 Implement MRI safety protocols, system maintenance, and quality assurance measures.
 
Unit 1 Basic Principles of MRI 12 hrs 
 
 Spin and Precession
 Relaxation Time (T1 and T2)
 Pulse Cycles
 T1-Weighted, T2-Weighted, and Proton Density Images
 
Unit 2 MRI Instrumentation and Image Formation 12 hrs 
 
 Types of MRI Magnets (Permanent, Resistive, Superconducting)
 RF Transmitter & Receiver Coils
 Gradient Coils and Shim Coils
 RF Shielding and Computers in MRI
 2D Fourier Transform and K-space Representation
 3D Fourier Imaging and Maximum Intensity Projection (MIP)
 
Unit 3 MRI Pulse Sequences and Advanced Techniques 12 hrs 
 
 Spin Echo & Turbo Spin Echo Sequences
 Gradient Echo & Turbo Gradient Echo Sequences
 Inversion Recovery Sequences (STIR, SPIR, FLAIR)
 Echo Planar Imaging and Fast Imaging Sequences
 Advanced Pulse Sequences
 Virtual Reality in MRI
 
Unit 4 MR Contrast, Clinical Protocols, and Artifacts 12 hrs 
 
 MRI Contrast Agents (Gadolinium-based)
 MR Angiography (TOF & PCA Techniques)
 MR Spectroscopy
 Whole-body MRI Protocols
 MRI Artifacts and Safety Aspects
 
Unit 5 Specialized MRI Applications, Safety, and Quality Assurance 12 hrs 
 
 Cardiac MRI
 Musculoskeletal MRI Protocols
 Abdominal MRI Protocols
 Functional MRI (fMRI) and BOLD Imaging
 MRI System Care and Maintenance
 Quality Assurance and Corrective Action
 
Course Learning Outcomes 
 Understand MRI Principles – Explain spin, precession, relaxation times (T1, T2), and pulse 
sequences in MRI imaging.
 Differentiate MRI Image Contrast – Identify T1-weighted, T2-weighted, and proton density 
images and their clinical relevance.
 Operate MRI Systems – Demonstrate knowledge of MRI components, pulse sequences, and 
contrast media for various imaging techniques.
 Analyze Image Formation & Artifacts – Understand Fourier transformation, K-space, MRI 
artifacts, and methods to improve image quality.
 Apply MRI Safety & Quality Assurance – Follow MRI safety protocols and perform quality 
control to ensure optimal system performance.
 
Textbooks: 
 Haacke, E. M. – Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Physical Principles and Sequence Design
(Wiley) 
 Westbrook, C. – MRI in Practice (Wiley-Blackwell)
 Bernstein, M. A., King, K. F., & Zhou, X. J. – Handbook of MRI Pulse Sequences (Elsevier)
 McRobbie, D. W., Moore, E. A., Graves, M. J., & Prince, M. R. – MRI from Picture to Proton
(Cambridge University Press) 
 Brant-Zawadzki, M., & Gillan, G. – Clinical Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Elsevier)
 
Reference Books: 
 Kuhl, C. K., & Barkhof, F. – Functional MRI: An Introduction to Methods (Oxford University 
Press)
 Elster, A. D. – Questions and Answers in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Mosby)
 Brown, R. W., Cheng, Y. C. N., Haacke, E. M., Thompson, M. R., & Venkatesan, R. – Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging: Physical and Biological Principles (Wiley)
 Nitz, W. R. – MRI Physics for Radiologists (Springer)
 Shellock, F. G. – MRI Bioeffects, Safety, and Patient Management (CRC Press)
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
II YEAR: III SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Care of Patients in Diagnostic Radiology L T P C 
MITT7508     
Paper-2 3 1 0 4 
 
Course Description 
This course provides comprehensive knowledge and practical skills in patient care within the 
radiology department. It covers essential aspects such as patient handling, infection control, 
emergency response, nursing procedures, and communication. The course emphasizes the role 
of imaging technologists in ensuring patient safety, comfort, and ethical medical practices. 
Course Objectives: 
 Understand the responsibilities of healthcare professionals in imaging departments.
 Learn proper patient transfer and restraint techniques for safety and comfort.
 Acquire knowledge of infection control measures and sterilization techniques.
 Develop skills for handling emergencies and first aid in radiology.
 Communicate effectively with patients, ensuring informed consent and education.
 Understand protocols for patient care during imaging of different body systems.
 
Unit 1 Introduction to Patient Care 12 hrs 
 
 Responsibilities of the Healthcare Facility
 Responsibilities of the Imaging Technologist
 
12 hrs 
 
 Patient Transfer Techniques
 Restraint Techniques
 Aspects of Patient Comfort
 Specific Patient Conditions
 Security of Patient Property
 Obtaining Vital Signs
 Laying Up a Sterile Trolley
 IV Injection Administration
Unit 3 Nursing Procedures in Radiology 12 hrs 
 
 General Abdominal Preparation
 Clothing of the Patient
 Giving an Enema
 Handling Emergencies in Radiology
 First Aid in the X-Ray Department
Unit 2 General Patient Care 
 
Unit 4 Patient Care During Investigations 12 hrs 
 Care during Imaging of:
 Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract
 Biliary Tract
 Respiratory Tract
 Gynecology
 Cardiovascular System
 Lymphatic System
 Central Nervous System (CNS)
 
Unit 5 Infection Control & Patient Education 12 hrs 
 
 Infection Control:
 Isolation Techniques
 Infection Sources & Transmission Modes
 Sterilization & Sterile Techniques
 Psychological Considerations
 Patient Education:
 Communication & Patient Communication Problems
 Explanation of Examinations
 Radiation Safety / Protection
 Interacting with Terminally Ill Patients
 Informed Consent
 
Course Learning Outcomes 
 Demonstrate competency in patient handling and care techniques in radiology.
 Apply infection control protocols and safety measures effectively.
 Manage and assist patients with specific conditions in diagnostic imaging procedures.
 Provide first aid and emergency care in radiology settings.
 Communicate effectively with patients regarding examinations and radiation safety.
 
Textbooks: 
 Ehrlich & Daly – Patient Care in Radiology
 Torres, Lillian S. – Basic Medical Techniques and Patient Care in Imaging Technology
 Ball & Moore – Introduction to Radiographic Imaging Sciences and Patient Care
 
Reference Books: 
 Bushong, Stewart C. – Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection
 Bontrager, Kenneth L. – Textbook of Radiographic Positioning and Related Anatomy
 Carlton & Adler – Principles of Radiographic Imaging: An Art and a Science
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
II YEAR: III SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Nuclear medicine imaging technique L T P C 
MITT7509     
Paper-3 3 1 0 4 
 
Course Description 
This course provides comprehensive knowledge and practical skills in patient care within the 
radiology department. It covers essential aspects such as patient handling, infection control, 
emergency response, nursing procedures, and communication. The course emphasizes the role 
of imaging technologists in ensuring patient safety, comfort, and ethical medical practices. 
Course Objectives: 
 Understand the responsibilities of healthcare professionals in imaging departments.
 Learn proper patient transfer and restraint techniques for safety and comfort.
 Acquire knowledge of infection control measures and sterilization techniques.
 Develop skills for handling emergencies and first aid in radiology.
 Communicate effectively with patients, ensuring informed consent and education.
 Understand protocols for patient care during imaging of different body systems.
 
Unit 1 Basic Atomic & Nuclear Physics 12 hrs 
 
 Quantities and Units
 Atom Composition and Structure
 Nucleus Composition
 Radioactivity & Exponential Decay
 Specific Activity
 Parent/Daughter Decay
 Modes of Radioactive Decay
 
Unit 2 Radiation Detectors & Radionuclide Production 12 hrs 
 
 Radiation Detectors:
 Gas-Filled Detectors (Ionization Chambers, Proportional Counters, Geiger-Müller Counters)
 Semiconductor Detectors
 Production of Radionuclides:
 Reactor-Produced Radionuclides (Principles & Applications)
 Accelerator-Produced Radionuclides
 Radionuclide Generators
Unit 3 Instrumentation & Radiopharmacy 12 hrs 
 
 Instrumentation in Nuclear Medicine:
 Anger Camera (Gamma Camera) – Basic Principles
 System Components (Detector System, Collimators, Electronics)
 Image Display and Recording Systems
 Scanning Cameras
 Radiopharmacy:
 Radiopharmaceuticals & Tracer Techniques
 Preparation of Labeled Compounds (Technetium-99m Isotope)
 Cold Kits
 
Unit 4 Imaging Techniques in Nuclear Medicine 12 hrs 
 
 In Vivo Techniques:
 Static and Dynamic Imaging
 Thyroid Imaging
 Bone, Respiratory, and Urinary System Imaging
 GI and Cardiovascular System Imaging
 Iodine-131 Uptake Studies & Therapy (Thyrotoxicosis, Thyroid Ablation)
 Image Quality in Nuclear Medicine:
 Spatial Resolution, Contrast, Noise, and Quality Assurance
 Variations in Image Perception (Physicians & Technologists)
 SPECT & PET Imaging
 
Unit 5 Radiation Safety & Monitoring in Nuclear Medicine 12 hrs 
 
 Radiation Safety Protocols:
 Radiation Units & Quantities
 Maximum Permissible Dose (MPD)
 Safe Handling & Storage of Radioactive Materials
 Procedures for Handling Spills
 Disposal of Radioactive Waste
 Radiation Monitoring Devices:
 Survey Meters & Personnel Dosimeters
 Wipe Testing & Contamination Monitoring
 Isotope Calibrators & Area Monitors
 Inventory of Isotopes
Course Learning Outcomes 
 Demonstrate a strong understanding of nuclear physics concepts relevant to medical imaging.
 Identify and operate radiation detectors used in nuclear medicine.
 
 Explain radionuclide production and radiopharmaceutical preparation techniques.
 Apply knowledge of SPECT and PET imaging in clinical applications.
 Follow radiation safety protocols and use radiation monitoring devices effectively.
 
Textbooks: 
 Chandra, Ramesh – Physics of Nuclear Medicine
 Cherry, Sorenson & Phelps – Physics in Nuclear Medicine
 Christian, Paul – Nuclear Medicine and PET/CT: Technology and Techniques
 
Reference Books: 
 Saha, Gopal B. – Physics and Radiobiology of Nuclear Medicine
 Bushberg, Jerrold T. – The Essential Physics of Medical Imaging
 Powsner, Rachel A. – Essential Nuclear Medicine Physics
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
II YEAR: III SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
 L T P C 
MITL7503     
Clinical Skills 3 0 0 16 8 
 
Course Description 
 This course provides hands-on training in advanced imaging techniques, patient care, safety 
protocols, and equipment handling in MRI and Nuclear Medicine. It focuses on practical 
applications of imaging technology, quality assurance, and clinical imaging protocols. The 
course is structured to equip students with essential skills for proficient imaging practice, 
patient management, and radiation safety in a clinical setting.
Course Objectives: 
 Develop practical expertise in MRI system operation, nuclear imaging, and radiation safety.
 Train students in patient care techniques, infection control, and emergency management in 
diagnostic imaging.
 Provide hands-on experience with MRI pulse sequences, nuclear medicine 
radiopharmaceuticals, and quality control measures.
 Enhance proficiency in advanced imaging techniques such as PET-CT, MR spectroscopy, and 
angiography.
 Ensure competence in radiation protection, system maintenance, and safe disposal of 
radioactive waste.
 
Unit 1 Imaging Technology and Instrumentation 30 hrs 
 MRI system operation: Console, RF coils, gradient coils, and shielding
 MRI pulse sequences: SE, TSE, GRE, STIR, FLAIR, EPI
 Nuclear Medicine: Radiation detection (Geiger-Müller counter, ionization chamber)
 Gamma camera operation and SPECT/PET imaging techniques
 Quality control tests for MRI and nuclear medicine systems
 
Unit 2 Patient Care, Safety, and Emergency Handling 30hrs 
 
 Patient handling, immobilization, and communication techniques
 Infection control, sterilization, and radiation safety procedures
 Management of contrast reactions and radiological emergencies
 First aid and CPR training for imaging professionals
 Ethical and medico-legal considerations in radiology
30 hrs 
 
 MRI contrast agents: Preparation, administration, and safety
 MR Angiography (TOF, PCA) and MR Spectroscopy
 Nuclear medicine radiopharmaceutical preparation and quality control
 Static and dynamic nuclear imaging techniques (Thyroid, Bone, Cardiac, Renal)
 PET-CT fusion imaging and applications
 
Unit 4 Clinical Imaging Protocols and Quality Assurance 30 hrs 
 
 MRI protocols for brain, abdomen, and musculoskeletal imaging
 Nuclear medicine clinical procedures and image interpretation
 Radiation dose optimization in CT, MRI, and nuclear imaging
 Artifacts in MRI and nuclear medicine: Causes and correction
 Quality assurance in patient care and imaging techniques
 
Unit 5 Radiation Protection, System Maintenance, and Waste Management 30 hrs 
 
 Radiation safety guidelines and personal dosimetry
 Safe handling, storage, and disposal of radioactive materials
 Routine maintenance and troubleshooting of MRI and nuclear medicine systems
 Quality control in imaging: SNR, uniformity, spatial resolution testing
 Case studies and clinical reporting of imaging findings
 
 
Course Outcomes 
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 Demonstrate proficiency in operating MRI and nuclear imaging equipment in a clinical setting.
 Perform patient handling, infection control, and emergency response in diagnostic radiology.
 Identify and correct imaging artifacts and optimize imaging techniques for accurate diagnosis.
 Interpret MRI and nuclear medicine imaging protocols and apply them to real-world clinical 
cases.
 Implement radiation safety protocols, perform quality control tests, and maintain imaging 
systems.
 
Textbooks: 
 Haacke, E. M. – Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Physical Principles and Sequence Design
(Wiley) 
 Westbrook, C. – MRI in Practice (Wiley-Blackwell)
 Bernstein, M. A., King, K. F., & Zhou, X. J. – Handbook of MRI Pulse Sequences (Elsevier)
 Christian, Paul – Nuclear Medicine and PET/CT: Technology and Techniques
 Ehrlich & Daly – Patient Care in Radiology
Unit 3 Specialized Imaging and Advanced Modalities 
 
Reference Books: 
 McRobbie, D. W., Moore, E. A., Graves, M. J., & Prince, M. R. – MRI from Picture to Proton
(Cambridge University Press) 
 Chandra, Ramesh – Physics of Nuclear Medicine
 Saha, Gopal B. – Physics and Radiobiology of Nuclear Medicine
 Shellock, F. G. – MRI Bioeffects, Safety, and Patient Management (CRC Press)
 Bushberg, Jerrold T. – The Essential Physics of Medical Imaging
AHS IMT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY COURSE 
II YEAR: IV SEMESTER 
Interventional Radiology Techniques L T P C 
MITT7510     
Paper-1 3 1 0 4 
 
 
Course Description: 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of interventional radiology procedures, 
focusing on both vascular and non-vascular interventions. It covers the fundamental principles 
of Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA), the instrumentation involved, patient care 
protocols, and various advanced interventional techniques. Additionally, the course highlights 
critical safety considerations in the Cath Lab, including radiation protection, equipment 
maintenance, and quality assurance practices. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students undergoing this course are expected to: 
1. Differentiate between vascular and non-vascular interventional procedures. 
2. Describe patient preparation, informed consent, Post-procedure care and Recognize the role of 
a radiographer in interventional radiology. 
3. Gain Proficiency in Non-Vascular Interventional Techniques. 
4. Discuss neuro-interventional techniques, including embolization and laser-guided procedures. 
5. Ensure Safety and Quality in Interventional Radiology. 
 
Students will gain theoretical knowledge and practical insights into diagnostic and 
therapeutic interventional procedures, preparing them for roles in radiological and 
interventional imaging settings. 
 
Unit 1 INTRODUCTION ON INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES 12 hrs 
 
 
 Vascular and non-vascular interventional procedures 
 Basic Principle and types of DSA 
 Instrumentation of Angiographic / DSA unit. Single and biplane angiographic unit, X-ray tube, 
Image intensifier, Flat panel detector, Recording system, Angiographic table and Control. 
Advanced applications, Image processing, 3-D rotational angiography, Advancements and 
future direction of angiographic 
 
Unit 2 PATIENT CARE 12 hrs 
 
Patient care: Preparation for procedure – post procedure care – role of radiographer in 
interventional procedure. 
 Informed consent, Interventional Radiology Team, Pressure injector, 
 Nursing care and Equipment for patient monitoring. 
 Needles, Catheters, guide wires, and other devices used for interventional procedures 
 Unit 3 NON VASCULAR INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES 12 hrs 
 
 
 Diagnostic & Therapeutic interventional procedures. 
 Brief review of different interventional procedures: PTC, PTBD, stenting – Nephrostomy – 
ureteric stenting – Guided biopsies of different organs and drainage collections/abscesses. 
 Radiofrequency ablation 
 Image guided nerve blocks 
 Vertebroplasty 
 
Unit 4 VASCULAR INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES 12 hrs 
 
 Neuro interventional procedures – Embolization of extra or intracranial tumors vascular 
malformations– direct puncture – laser guided procedure. Basics of cardiac catheterization. 
 Uterine artery embolization (Problems in obstetrics and gynecology) 
 Angiography, Angioplasty, Venography and Lymphangiography 
 Embolization, Thrombolysis 
 Trans-jugular Intrahepatic Porto-systemic Shunt (TIPS). 
 Balloon-Occluded Retrograde Trans-venous Obliteration (BRTO) 
 
Unit 5 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS IN CATH LAB 12 hrs 
 
 
 Safety considerations in cath lab – room design – protective devices – radiation monitoring. 
 Care, Maintenance and tests, General care – functional tests – Quality assurance program – 
Acceptable limits of variation – Corrective action. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. "Interventional Radiology: A Survival Guide" – Kieran P. J. Murphy & Fergus V. Coakley 
2. Handbook of Interventional Radiologic Procedures" – John A. Kaufman & Michael J. Lee 
3. Vascular and Interventional Radiology: The Requisites" – John A. Kaufman & Michael J. Lee 
4. Interventional Radiology Procedures in Biopsy and Drainage" – Deborah J. Rubens & Mark 
E. 
Reference books: 
1. Grainger & Allison’s Diagnostic Radiology" (Interventional Section) – Andy Adam et al. 
2. "Fundamentals of Diagnostic Radiology" – William E. Brant & Clyde Helms 
3. "Radiation Protection in Interventional Radiology" – ICRP Publication 117 
4. "Textbook of Cardiovascular Intervention" – Craig A. Thompson & Emmanouil Brilakis 
5. "Interventional Oncology: Principles and Practice" – Riad Salem & Jean-Francois Geschwind 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
II YEAR: IV SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Radiation Safety and Protection L T P C 
MITT7511     
Paper 2 3 1 0 4 
 
Course Description 
This course provides an in-depth understanding of radiation protection principles, including 
the need for protection, radiation exposure measurement, regulatory guidelines, biological 
effects, and safety measures. It covers essential topics such as radiation units, exposure limits, 
protective techniques, and advancements in radiation safety across various medical imaging 
modalities. 
Course Objectives 
 To understand the fundamental principles of radiation protection.
 To learn about radiation exposure limits and safety regulations.
 To study the biological effects of radiation on human health.
 To explore radiation protection techniques in different imaging modalities.
 To analyze advancements in radiation safety and protective equipment.
 
Unit 1 Fundamentals of Radiation Protection 12 hrs 
 
 Need, aim, and objectives of radiation protection
 Background radiation and sources
 History of radiation accidents
 Basic radiation units and quantities (Exposure, Absorbed Dose, Equivalent Dose, Effective 
Dose, Radiation Quality Factor, Tissue Weighting Factor, Mean Glandular Dose)
 
Unit 2 Radiation Exposure and Safety Standards 12 hrs 
 
 Cardinal principles of radiation exposure
 ALARA and ALARP concepts
 Maximum permissible dose limits
 Radiation protection bodies and regulations (ICRP, NCRP, AERB, WHO guidelines)
 Construction of radiology departments
 Calculation of primary, scattered, and leakage radiation
 X-ray room design and structural shielding
 Protective devices and AERB guidelines for equipment installation
 
Unit 3 Radiation Safety in Medical Imaging 12 hrs 
 Radiation signages and their significance
 Technical protective considerations during radiography
 Radiation hazards evaluation
 Beam limiting and centering devices
 Filtration and exposure control
 Radiation protection in: Fluoroscopy
 Mammography 
 Mobile radiograph 
 CT scan 
 Angiography 
 
Unit 4 Biological Effects and Radiation Monitoring 12 hrs 
 
 Radiation measuring instruments (Area monitoring, Personnel Dosimeters)
 Biological aspects of radiation protection
 Direct and indirect effects of radiation
 Deterministic and stochastic effects (Somatic & Genetic effects)
 Radiation effects at the cellular level
 Dose-response relationships
 Acute radiation syndromes
 Qualification and ethics for radiation workers
 
Unit 5 Radiation Protection in Special Conditions and Advances 12 hrs 
 
 
Exposure dose considerations in: 
 Pregnancy
 Infants
 Pediatrics
 Geriatrics
 
 Radiation workers
 10th Day Rule / 14th Day Rule / 28th Day Rule 
Radiation protection in:
 Nuclear medicine
 Radiation therapy
Advancements in radiation protection techniques 
 
 
Course Outcomes 
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand radiation protection principles and exposure limits. 
2. Apply radiation safety measures in different imaging modalities. 
3. Evaluate biological effects and radiation risk factors. 
4. Implement safety protocols for radiation workers and patients. 
5. Utilize advancements in radiation protection for improved safety 
 
Textbooks: 
 Bushong, S. C. (2020). Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection. 
Elsevier. 
 Martin, C. J., & Sutton, D. G. (2018). Practical Radiation Protection in Healthcare. Oxford 
University Press. 
 Turner, J. E. (2017). Atoms, Radiation, and Radiation Protection. Wiley. 
 
Reference Books: 
 ICRP Publications (Latest editions). Recommendations of the International Commission on 
Radiological Protection. 
 Knoll, G. F. (2020). Radiation Detection and Measurement. Wiley. 
 Upton, A. C. (2019). Radiation Protection and Dosimetry: Fundamentals and Applications. 
Springer. 
 National Council on Radiation Protection (NCRP) Reports (Latest editions). 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
II YEAR: IV SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Management of Healthcare Organizations L T P C 
MITT7603     
Paper-3 3 0 0 3 
 
 
 
Course Description 
This course provides a comprehensive understanding of healthcare management, hospital 
administration, and digital healthcare systems relevant to radiology. It covers fundamental 
management principles, economic aspects of healthcare, quality assurance, and the integration 
of digital technologies like PACS, RIS, and HIS in radiology departments. The course also 
includes regulatory aspects such as the Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (PNDT) Act and 
logistics management in healthcare. 
Course Objectives: 
 Upon completion of this course, students will: 
 Understand core healthcare management principles, including decision-making, staffing, 
leadership, and motivation in hospital administration. 
 Analyze economic aspects of healthcare, including budgeting, cost management, and financial 
planning in hospitals. 
 Gain expertise in hospital administration, department management, clinical services, and 
quality assurance. 
 Evaluate healthcare technologies and digital healthcare informatics, including PACS, RIS, and 
HIS. 
 Understand legal frameworks related to healthcare technology and radiology. 
 
Unit 1 Principles of Healthcare Management 12 hrs 
 
 Functions of management 
 Decision-making processes 
 Organizing and staffing in healthcare 
 Leadership and motivation in hospital administration 
 Organizational behavior and stress management 
 
12 hrs 
 
 Demand and supply in healthcare 
 Nature of costs and cost control 
 Marginal cost and breakeven analysis 
 Budgeting and financial planning for hospitals 
 Role of government in healthcare economics 
Unit 2 Radiation Detectors & Radionuclide Production 
 
Unit 3 Hospital Administration and Healthcare Services Management 12 hrs 
 
 Departmentation in hospitals 
 Management of clinical and support services 
 Utility services in hospitals 
 Evaluation of hospital services 
 Quality management and accreditation 
 
Unit 4 Healthcare Technology and Informatics 12 hrs 
 
 Present trends and challenges in healthcare technology 
 Planning and adoption of appropriate healthcare technology 
 Evaluation methods for healthcare technology 
 The Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques Act, 1994 
 Hospital Management Information System (HMIS) 
 Logistics management in healthcare 
 
Unit 5 Radiology Information Systems and Digital Healthcare 12 hrs 
 
 Radiology Information System (RIS) 
 Hospital Information System (HIS) 
 Design and management of radiology departments 
 PACS and teleradiology applications 
 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) in radiology 
 
 
Course Learning Outcomes 
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Demonstrate a strong understanding of healthcare management principles. 
2. Apply financial planning and budgeting strategies in hospital administration. 
3. Organize and manage hospital services, including quality assurance and accreditation. 
4. Evaluate and implement healthcare technologies and information systems. 
5. Utilize radiology information systems, PACS, and teleradiology effectively. 
6. Understand regulatory and ethical considerations in medical imaging. 
 
Textbooks: 
 Gupta, S. & Kant, S. – Hospital Administration and Management: A Comprehensive Guide
 Goel, S. L. & Kumar, R. – Healthcare Management and Administration
 McConnell, C. R. – Umiker's Management Skills for the New Health Care Supervisor
 Goyal, R. C. – Hospital Administration and Human Resource Management
 Carr, P. B. & Feldstein, P. J. – Health Economics: Theory, Insights, and Industry Studies
Reference Books: 
 Brown, M. G. – Healthcare Quality Management: Tools and Applications
 Park, K. – Preventive and Social Medicine
 Sharma, S. K. – Hospital Administration: Principles and Practice
 Bushberg, J. T., Boone, J. M., & Seibert, J. A. – The Essential Physics of Medical Imaging
 Pandey, A. – Healthcare Informatics and Hospital Management
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
II YEAR: IV SEMESTER 
THEORY SYLLABUS 
Clinical Skills 4 L T P C 
MITL7504     
 0 0 16 8 
 
 
 
Course Description 
This course provides practical training in interventional radiology techniques and radiation 
protection strategies to ensure safe and effective diagnostic and therapeutic imaging. The 
course is structured into five practical units, covering advanced catheter-based procedures, 
vascular and non-vascular interventions, patient care, radiation safety protocols, and quality 
assurance in interventional radiology and nuclear medicine. 
 
 
Course Objectives 
 
 Train students in vascular and non-vascular interventional procedures using Digital 
Subtraction Angiography (DSA), fluoroscopy, and ultrasound guidance.
 Develop expertise in handling interventional devices such as guidewires, catheters, stents, and 
embolization materials.
 Provide hands-on experience in radiation safety, monitoring, and quality assurance in 
interventional and diagnostic imaging.
 Enhance students' knowledge of radiation protection strategies in nuclear medicine, 
fluoroscopy, and PET-CT imaging.
 Equip students with the necessary skills to implement safety regulations, radiation dose 
optimization, and emergency preparedness in medical imaging.
 
 
 
 
Unit 1 Instrumentation and Techniques in Interventional Radiology 30 hrs 
 
 
 
 Need, aim, and objectives of radiation protection
 Background radiation and sources
 History of radiation accidents
 Basic radiation units and quantities (Exposure, Absorbed Dose, Equivalent Dose, Effective 
Dose, Radiation Quality Factor, Tissue Weighting Factor, Mean Glandular Dose)
30 hrs 
 
 Vascular Interventions:
 Angioplasty and stent placement (coronary, carotid, renal arteries).
 Embolization techniques for tumors, aneurysms, and hemorrhages.
 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure.
 Non-Vascular Interventions:
 Ultrasound and CT-guided biopsies (liver, lung, kidney).
 Percutaneous nephrostomy, biliary drainage, and ureteric stenting.
 Vertebroplasty and radiofrequency ablation for pain management.
 
Unit 3 Patient Care and Safety in Interventional Radiology 30 hrs 
 
 Patient preparation for invasive procedures and sedation protocols. 
 Monitoring of vital parameters and managing complications during interventional procedures. 
 Emergency management of contrast reactions and hemorrhagic events. 
 Sterile field maintenance and infection control in interventional radiology. 
 Radiation protection for patients, operators, and healthcare workers in the interventional 
suite. 
 
Unit 4 Radiation Safety and Protection in Medical Imaging 30 hrs 
 
 Hands-on use of dosimeters, survey meters, and ionization chambers.
 Radiation exposure calculations for X-ray, fluoroscopy, CT, and nuclear medicine.
 Shielding techniques: Lead aprons, thyroid shields, mobile barriers, and room shielding design.
 Safe handling and disposal of radioactive materials in nuclear medicine.
 Special considerations for radiation protection in pediatric and pregnant patients.
 
Unit 5 Quality Assurance and Compliance in Radiation Protection 30 hrs 
 
 
 Routine quality control checks for fluoroscopy, CT, and nuclear imaging systems.
 Compliance with international radiation safety guidelines (ICRP, NCRP, AERB).
 Radiation safety audits and monitoring in hospital environments.
 Case study-based analysis of radiation accidents and corrective measures.
 Implementation of dose reduction techniques in medical imaging.
Unit 2 Vascular and Non-Vascular Interventional Procedures 
 
Course Outcomes 
Upon completion, students will be able to: 
1. Demonstrate proficiency in handling interventional radiology equipment and techniques. 
2. Perform patient preparation, monitoring, and post-procedure care in interventional radiology. 
3. Assist in vascular and non-vascular procedures, including biopsies, embolization, and stenting. 
4. Implement radiation safety measures and quality assurance protocols in interventional 
radiology and nuclear medicine. 
5. Analyze radiation hazards, monitor exposure, and ensure compliance with safety regulations. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Bushong, S. C. – Radiologic Science for Technologists: Physics, Biology, and Protection 
(Elsevier). 
2. Haacke, E. M. – Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Physical Principles and Sequence Design 
(Wiley). 
3. Christian, P. – Nuclear Medicine and PET/CT: Technology and Techniques (Elsevier). 
4. Ehrlich & Daly – Patient Care in Radiology (Elsevier). 
5. Bernstein, M. A. – Handbook of MRI Pulse Sequences (Elsevier). 
 
Reference Books: 
1. ICRP Publications (Latest Editions) – International Commission on Radiological Protection 
Guidelines. 
2. Knoll, G. F. – Radiation Detection and Measurement (Wiley). 
3. Upton, A. C. – Radiation Protection and Dosimetry: Fundamentals and Applications 
(Springer). 
4. McRobbie, D. W. & Moore, E. A. – MRI from Picture to Proton (Cambridge University 
Press). 
5. Bushberg, J. T. – The Essential Physics of Medical Imaging (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins). 
AHS MIT 
M Sc. MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY 
II YEAR: III & IV SEMESTER 
 
MITP7501 
MITP7502 
Research Project and Viva L T P C 
 0 0 14 7 
 
 
 
 Course description: 
The Research Dissertation course enables students to develop knowledge and understanding of 
a specialist area of research problem within the broad fields of physiotherapy associating within 
the specialty and transformative with multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary programs. This 
course is intended to be conducted through individual supervision and training, Student should 
carry out the procedure of Data collection and apply statistical procedures in analyzing and 
interpreting data under supervision of Guide. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 Formulate a research hypothesis and design a structured research methodology. 
 Conduct a systematic literature review and identify research gaps. 
 Collect, analyze, and interpret research data using appropriate statistical tools. 
 Develop scientific writing skills for dissertation and research publication. 
 Present research findings effectively through oral and written communication. 
 
Unit 1 Research Design and Proposal Development 30 hrs 
 
 Need, aim, and objectives of radiation protection 
 Background radiation and sources 
 History of radiation accidents 
 Basic radiation units and quantities (Exposure, Absorbed Dose, Equivalent Dose, Effective 
Dose, Radiation Quality Factor, Tissue Weighting Factor, Mean Glandular Dose) 
 
 
Unit 2 Literature Review and Methodology 30 hrs 
 
 Conducting a systematic literature review (PubMed, Scopus, Google Scholar) 
 Identifying research gaps and framing research questions 
 Understanding study variables and sampling techniques 
 Data collection methods in medical imaging research 
 Research tools and questionnaire design 
 Reliability, validity, and bias in research. 
Unit 3 Data Collection and Statistical Analysis 40 hrs 
 
 Data collection techniques: Imaging parameters and quantitative measurements 
 Introduction to biostatistics in medical imaging 
 Descriptive statistics: Mean, median, standard deviation 
 Inferential statistics: t-tests, ANOVA, correlation, regression analysis 
 Use of statistical software (SPSS, R, Excel) 
 Presentation of results using tables, graphs, and charts 
 
Unit 4 Scientific Writing and Dissertation Preparation 40 hrs 
 
 Structure of a dissertation: Introduction, methodology, results, discussion, conclusion 
 Writing an abstract and summarizing findings 
 Referencing styles (APA, Vancouver) and plagiarism check 
 Common errors in scientific writing and how to avoid them 
 
Unit 5 Research Presentation and Defense 40 hrs 
 Preparing a research presentation (PowerPoint, poster) 
 Techniques for effective research communication 
 Addressing reviewers’ and examiners’ questions 
 Defense of dissertation: Oral examination and viva voce 
 Submission of final dissertation following university guide 
 
Course Outcomes 
Upon completion of this dissertation, students will: 
1. Develop an independent research project with proper methodology. 
2. Conduct a literature review to identify research gaps. 
3. Apply statistical tools to analyze imaging data. 
4. Write a structured dissertation and prepare a research manuscript. 
5. Present and defend their research findings effectively. 
 
Textbooks 
1. Kothari, C. R. (2021). Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques. New Age 
International. 
2. Dawson, C. (2019). A Practical Guide to Research Methods. Oxford University Press. 
References: 
1. Creswell, J. W. (2022). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods 
Approaches. Sage Publications. 
2. Peat, J. (2020). Scientific Writing: Easy When You Know How. BMJ Books. 
3. Montgomery, D. C. (2021). Design and Analysis of Experiments. Wiley. 
 